The International Monetary Fund's intervention in education systems  

its impact on children's chances of completing school  

and  

 
 
 
 

Adel Daoud1,2, *,  

 

 

 

 

(Version 22 December 2021) 

 
 
w 
 
1. Institute for Analytical Sociology, Department of Management and Engineering, Linköping 
University, Norrköping, Sweden.w 
2. The Division of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence of the Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden 
 
 
* Corresponding author: adel.daoud@liu.se 

 

1 

 

 

 

2 

Enabling  children  to  acquire  an  education  is  one  of  the  most  effective  means  to  reduce 
inequality, poverty, and ill-health globally. While in normal times a government controls its 
educational  policies,  during  times  of  macroeconomic  instability,  that  control  may  shift  to 
supporting  international  organizations,  such  as  the  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF). 
While  much  research  has  focused  on  which  sectors  has  been  affected  by  IMF  policies, 
scholars have devoted little attention to the policy content of IMF interventions affecting the 
education  sector  and  children's  education  outcomes:  denoted  IMF-education  policies.  This 
article evaluates the extent which IMF-education policies exist in all programs and how these 
policies and  IMF programs affect children's likelihood of completing schools. While  IMF-
education  policies  have  a  small  adverse  effect  yet  statistically  insignificant  on  children's 
probability  of  completing  school,  these  policies  moderate  effect  heterogeneity  for  IMF 
programs.  The  effect  of  IMF  programs  (joint  set  of  policies)  adversely  effect  children's 
chances  of  completing  school  by  six  percentage  points.  By  analyzing  how  IMF-education 
policies but also how IMF programs affect the education sector in low- and middle-income 
countries, scholars  will gain a deeper understanding of how such policies will likely affect 
downstream outcomes.  
 
 

 

 

3 

Table of Contents 
1 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 5 
2  Method and data ................................................................................................................. 6 
2.1  The outcome: child-education deprivation .................................................................. 6 
2.2  The exposures: IMF-education policies and IMF programs ....................................... 7 
2.3  Method ......................................................................................................................... 8 
Identifying IMF-education policies in policy text ................................................ 8 
2.3.1 
2.3.2 
Statistical analysis: estimating ATE and CATE .................................................. 8 
2.3.3  Generalized random forest ................................................................................. 10 
2.3.4  Handling selection bias ...................................................................................... 11 
3  Results .............................................................................................................................. 12 
3.1  Measuring IMF-education policy .............................................................................. 12 
3.2  Evaluating the effect of IMF-education policies on children's chances of completing 
school 12 
3.3  Qualitative analysis of IMF-policy documents: the link between IMF programs and 
children's educational outcomes. ......................................................................................... 14 
4  Discussion ........................................................................................................................ 16 
5  References ........................................................................................................................ 17 
Tables ............................................................................................................................... 22 
6 
7 
Figures .............................................................................................................................. 25 
8  Appendix .......................................................................................................................... 28 
8.1  Appendix A: Measures .............................................................................................. 28 
8.2  Appendix B: Heckman Selection model ................................................................... 32 

 
 
 

 

 

4 

Introduction 

1 
Enabling  children  to  acquire  an  education  is  one  of  the  most  effective  means  to  reduce 
inequality,  poverty,  and  ill-health  globally  (Banerjee  and  Duflo  2012;  Deaton  2015;  Sen 
1999). Having an education is also a critical ingredient for empowering girls in their future 
endeavors and decreasing the gap of unequal life opportunities (Breen and Jonsson 2005). The 
likelihood of a child completing schools depends on not only micro factors such as family 
living-conditions  but  also  macro  factors:  government's  effectiveness,  structure  of  the 
education system (e.g., private or public schools) (Conklin et al. 2018; Halleröd et al. 2013; 
Nandy,  Daoud,  and  Gordon  2016;  Ponce  et  al.  2017;  Rothstein  2011),  and  the  amount  of 
social spending on its education spending. The quality of the education system determines to a 
considerable  extent  a  child's  probability  of  completing  school  (Abdullahi  2015).  While  in 
normal times a government controls its educational policies, during times of macroeconomic 
instability,  that  control  may  shift  to  supporting  international  organizations -- eroding  their 
sovereignty  over  domestic  affairs.  That  shift  in  control  is  likely  to  lead  to  unexpected 
consequences, and in the worst-case jeopardizing children's chances to acquire an education 
(Alexander 2001; Buchmann 1996; Daoud et al. 2017; Daoud and Johansson 2020; Moosa 
and Moosa 2019; Nielsen 2006).  
 
One  of  the  most  powerful  international  organizations  is  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
(IMF). As one of the several organizations sanctioned by the United Nation, the IMF's role is 
to support governments in macroeconomics turmoil (Vreeland 2007). It provides this support 
in an IMF program that contains financial assistance but also a set of policy conditions. In 
exchange for its support, the IMF requires that the government to implement a set of policy 
conditions that the IMF considers addressing the route of these macroeconomics imbalances. 
These policies are generally of neoliberal nature: liberalizing trade, privatizing state-owned 
companies,  and  deregulating  markets  (Babb  2005).  While  much  research  has  focused  on 
which  sectors  has  been  affected  by  IMF  policies  (Daoud,  Herlitz,  and  Subramanian  2020; 
Dreher 2005, 2006; Vreeland 2007), especially health spending, scholars have devoted little 
attention  to  the  policy  content  of  IMF  interventions  affecting  the  education  sector  and 
children's  education  outcomes.  Existing  studies  find  that  IMF  policies  tend  to  decrease 
education  spending  (Stubbs  et  al.  2018),  but  it  remains  unclear  the  extent  which  the  IMF 
explicitly targets education sector directly through what we call IMF-education policies, and 
how  such  targeting  affects  children's  education  outcomes.  By  IMF-education  policies  we 
mean  a  policy  that  explicitly  and  directly  stipulates  a  change  in  the  education  system.  An 
IMF-education  policy  exists  predominately  as  one  of  several  other  IMF  policies,  bundled 
together  in  IMF  programs.  While  several  datasets  exist  on  IMF  programs  (e.g.  Vreeland 
2007),  only  the  IMF's  Monitoring  of  Fund  Arrangements  database  (MONA)  offers 
disaggregated information about the content of these programs. Nonetheless, MONA has been 
shown to be incomplete (Arpac, Bird, and Mandilaras 2008; Daoud, Reinsberg, et al. 2019; 
IEO 2007; Kentikelenis, Stubbs, and King 2016). The IMF conditionality dataset improves on 
this incompleteness by capturing a range of policy areas. Nonetheless, none of these capture 
IMF-education policies.  
 
By analyzing how IMF-education policies but also how IMF programs affect the education 
sector in low- and middle-income countries, scholars will gain a deeper understanding of how 
such  policies  will  likely  affect  downstream  outcomes  (Stuckler  and  Basu  2013).  These 
outcomes  range  from  not  only  the  number  of  children  graduating  but  also  the  quality  of 
university  studies,  number  of  young  adults  in  employment,  and  similar  outcomes. 
Policymakers  will  gain  insights  into  the  likely  affects  should  their  country  implement  IMF 
programs. 

 

5 

 
The purpose of our article is it to evaluate the extent which IMF-education policies exist in all 
programs    and  how  these  policies  and  IMF  programs  affect  children's  likelihood  of 
completing  schools.  First,  our  analysis  identifies  which  IMF  policies  contain  explicit 
reference  to  the  education  sector  across  all  IMF  policies  in  the  period  1985-2014.  Besides 
evaluating  extent,  this  identification  shows  the  temporal  and  geographical  spread  of  IMF-
education policies in the past. This analysis reveals the content of IMF-education policies, and 
how many conditions contain explicit reference to education. Second, besides deepening the 
scholarly knowledge on how IMF-education policies affect countries around the world, our 
analysis  supplies  a  dataset  that  quantifies  such  policies -- supporting  future  research.  Third, 
using this IMF-education data, our analysis evaluates the impact of IMF-education policies 
and  IMF  programs  on  children's  chances  of  completing  primary  or  secondary  school.  Our 
analysis relies on the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) and Multiple Indicator Cluster 
Survey (MICS), measuring the living conditions for over one million children living across 
half-a-million  families  and  67  low  and  middle-income  countries.  These  measurements  are 
representative samples of about half the worlds population around the year 2000. 
 
 Our policy evaluation captures both the average treatment effect (ATE) and the conditional 
average treatment effect (CATE). Because IMF policies are likely to affect groups of children 
differently, merely reporting ATE mask that variation in effect -- called effect heterogeneity. 
An  additional  CATE  analysis  unpacks  this  effect  heterogeneity  across  children's  country, 
family,  and  individual  characteristics.  To  identify  CATE,  we  use  a  data-driven  approach 
relying on statistical models for causal inference and machine learning -- algorithms that find 
patterns in the data (Athey and Imbens 2017; Daoud and Dubhashi 2021; Hill 2011; Kino et 
al. 2021; Mullainathan and Spiess 2017). 

2  Method and data 
2.1  The outcome: child-education deprivation  
 

We rely on the Bristol  method to define  children's education outcomes, denotes as 𝑌𝑌. The 

Bristol  method  is  a  deprivation  approach  developed  by  Peter  Townsend,  his  team,  and 
UNICEF in 2003. A child is defined as deprived of an education, if that child "had never been 
to school and were not currently attending school, in other words, no professional education 
of any kind." The outcome, child-education deprivation, is a binary variable where one means 
"deprived" and zero means "not deprived." This outcome applies to children 7 -- 17 years old.  
 
Our  data  consists  of  household  data  from  the  DHS  and  MICS.  These  surveys  are  cross-
sectional and nationally representative household surveys conducted several in middle-income 
and  low-income  countries.  As  these  two  surveys  have  identical  sampling  frameworks,  we 
combine their data (Corsi et al. 2012). Using interviews, the response rate for these surveys 
normally exceed 90%. National samples range from 4,000 to 30,000 households depending on 
the population size. The DHS (2011) provides further information about the survey design. 
 
We selected surveys from countries that were sampled around the year 2000. The DHS rolls 
out  these  surveys  at  different  time  points  for  each  country.  Our  pooled  data  spans  1995  to 
2005. Our household sample captures 1,150,711 children, representative of about 2.8 billion 
households,  or  roughly  50  percent  of  the  world's  population  in  the  year  2000.  Figure  1 
highlights the sample's geographical distribution of child poverty.  
 

 

6 

 
[Figure 1 about here] 
2.2  The exposures: IMF-education policies and IMF programs 

Our analysis covers two types of exposures denoted jointly as 𝑊𝑊: IMF-education policies 𝑊𝑊1 
and IMF programs 𝑊𝑊2. As defined in the Introduction, IMF programs are a set of policies that 

IMF  and  government  officials  have  signed  and  agreed  to  implement  in  the  target  country. 
These programs consist of a set of policies, ranging from a few to up to five dozen. These 
policies  consist  of  a  variety  of  interventions,  from  small  (e.g.,  appointing  an  expert  for  a 
specific  area)  to  large  ones  (e.g.,  privatizing  state-owned  companies).    IMF  program  is  a 
binary variable. We collect these data from the IMF, as they are freely available.  
 
By  IMF-education  policy,  we  mean  a  policy  that  explicitly  targets  a  country's  education 
system.  Clear  cases  are  when  the  IMF  explicitly  requires  introducing  education  fees, 
privatizing schools, or targeting teachers' salaries (up or down). While an IMF policy may 
require that a government adjusts its fiscal spending to achieve balance, which is not an IMF-
education policy as it does not directly reference the education system, but asking to reduce 
social or public spending is a borderline case. These are borderline cases, as public or social 
spending often consist or closely overlaps with education spending and priorities in the social 
system. Demanding a reduction in public or social spending pushes the agency from the IMF 
to  the  government  in  deciding  whether  the  education  system  should  be  affected  or  not. 
Although  these  borderline  cases  are  important  determinants  for  changes  in  the  education 
system, they are too general for our purposes. That general case is included in our definition 
of IMF programs. For our purposes, we select a more stringent definition of IMF-education 
policies. A policy condition must include at least one of the following terms to qualify as an 
IMF-education policy, 
 

 

"[Ee]duca[Uu]niversit[yies][Ss]chool[Pp]edagog[Tt]eacher[Pp]roffesor[Ll]ectur[Ss]tu
dent[Pp]upil[Cc]lassroom[Cc]urricul[Ll]earn[Ac]adem" 

We denote this list or dictionary as 𝐷𝐷. The symbol "[ ]" means the term can be either 

capitalized or not and "" means or. Despite that the list is short, it is calibrated to effectively 
capture policy text predominately relevant for education systems. A broad term list risks 
capturing irrelevant policies. As described in the Method section, we then match these terms 
to the IMF conditionality dataset, covering all IMF programs between 1985 to 2014. These 
data are derived from 4,500 IMF-program documents and include 58,406 conditions across 
131 countries. 
 
For  the  67-countries  with  household  data,  separate  from  the  131  countries,  we  collected 
additional  policy-text  data,  to  substantiate  our  statistical  findings.  With  that  collection,  we 
analyzed  IMF  program  in  depth,  as  documented  in  the  IMF's  Executive  Board  Specials 
(EBS) -- digitally  and  freely  available  at  the  IMF  website.  An  EBS  documents  lay  out  the 
national context and the specific policy conditions that the IMF and the particular government 
have drafted for a final agreement. These are then submitted -- often with no or only minor 
amendments -- to the IMF executive board for formal approval. As an IMF program usually 
runs for three years, with an additional period of extension (Vreeland 2007), we searched EBS 
documents in a six-year window, set to three years before and after the starting date of an IMF 
program. This window ensures that we capture policy drafts and updates relevant for program 
implementation. 
 

 

7 

Identifying IMF-education policies in policy text 

2.3  Method 
2.3.1 
We use natural language processing to identify IMF-education policies (Åkerström, Daoud, 
and Johansson 2019; Daoud, Reinsberg, et al. 2019). As the IMF conditionality data records 
the  actual  policy  conditions  as  it  is  written  in  its  EBS  document,  we  capitalize  on  this  to 

number  of  policy  conditions  searched,  that  is,  58,406.  Before  the  search,  used  standard 
cleaning procedures recommended in text mining (Jockers 2014), by removing numbers and 

identify IMF-education policies. Call the policy-condition text or corpus for 𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖, where i is the 
special characters as those do not carry qualitative meaning.1 We then processed 𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖, resulting 
vector of words 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖. The index k captures the number of words in policy condition i.  
We then use our dictionary 𝐷𝐷 -- the list of terms identifying IMF-education policy defined in 
the Data section -- and apply it to a search function 𝑓𝑓. This function takes 𝐷𝐷 as input, matches 
with a regular-expression searches, each word in term by term, whether 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 matches with any 
of the terms in 𝐷𝐷. If it does match, then the output of 𝑓𝑓 is one and conclude that the policy is 

likely an IMF-education policy; otherwise, the output is zero. More formally, we write this as 
follows, 
 

in a document-term (in our case, conditionality-word) matrix, where each is represented as a 

 

𝑓𝑓(𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖)= � 1,
0,

𝑖𝑖𝑓𝑓 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ∈𝐷𝐷  
𝑖𝑖𝑓𝑓 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ∉𝐷𝐷  

 
After matching, we sampled the results to verify that the whole policy text does indeed 
directly affect the education system.  
2.3.2  Statistical analysis: estimating ATE and CATE 
 
We combine a policy evaluation and machine learning methodology to estimate the impact of 
IMF  program  on  children's  risk  of  education  deprivation  (Daoud  and  Dubhashi  2020). 
Machine learning constitutes a set of nonparametric algorithms. In contrast to other statistical 
techniques  such  as  generalized  linear  models,  these  algorithms  are  designed  to  optimize 
prediction  without  specific  programming  rules  (Hastie,  Tibshirani,  and  Friedman  2009). 
However,  when  combined  with  a  policy-evaluation  techniques,  these  learning  algorithms 
provide at least four capabilities that traditional estimation techniques lack. In the outline that 
follows, we use the term learning algorithms to refer specifically to those machine learning 
algorithms  that  have  been  adapted  for  policy  evaluation  (Athey  and  Imbens  2017;  Athey, 
Tibshirani,  and  Wager  2019).  At  the  core  of  these  adapted  algorithms -- compared  to 
traditional machine learning algorithms -- lay the assumption of an experimental (ignorability 
by  randomization)  or  quasi-experimental  design  (conditional  ignorability).  In  our  case,  we 
draw on the quasi-experimental design that our conceptual framework provides.  
 
Expected  individual  counterfactuals.  Under  an  assumption  of  conditional  ignorability, 
learning algorithms allow us to impute the expected counterfactuals for each child (Daoud and 
Dubhashi 2021; Künzel et al. 2018). Matching methods is another instance of nonparametric 
techniques,  but  they  rely  instead  on  finding  comparable  cases  in-sample.  In  addition, 
matching  methods  use  all  the  covariates  at  their  disposal,  even  those  with  low  statistical 

 

1 We tested to lemmatize and stemming the corpus, in contrast to keep the corpus as it is. After validation we 
decided to rely on regular expression for the text search, as that produce the most robust results (in the sense that 
it gave the most conservative and valid hits regarding food and agricultural issues) 

 

8 

relevance  for  the  outcome,  while  learning  algorithms  use  mainly  those  variables  that  are 
predictive of the outcome. As long as the treated and control populations are comparable (in 
line  with  the  overlap  assumption  discussed  above),  imputing  counterfactuals  provides  a 
flexible  method  to  conduct  policy  evaluation.  We  capitalize  on  this  and  impute  a 
counterfactual for each child in our sample. The difference between these counterfactuals is 
the  individual-level  treatment  effect.  The  difference  between  these  counterfactuals  is  the 
individual-level  conditional  average 

treatment  effect,  𝜏𝜏(𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖,𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑖)= 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌(1)− 𝑌𝑌(0)𝑋𝑋=
𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖,𝐹𝐹=𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑖]. This effect is a function of the observed covariates, 𝑋𝑋=𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖, and the type of model 
selected, 𝐹𝐹=𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑖.  
specify  an  interaction: 𝑌𝑌= 𝛽𝛽0+ 𝛽𝛽1𝑊𝑊+ 𝛽𝛽2𝑋𝑋+𝛽𝛽3𝑊𝑊∙𝑋𝑋+𝑒𝑒.  They  would  then  test  this 
model  against  the  data  to  verify  whether 𝛽𝛽3  is  significantly  different  from  zero.  Learning 

 
Inductive  investigation  of  impact  heterogeneity.    Learning  algorithms  find  impact 
heterogeneity inductively. Traditional regression requires that the analysts specify interaction 
variables explicitly, guided by theory. To manage complexity, they tend to specify two-way 
or at most three-way interactions (Neumayer and Plümper 2017). For example, if a researcher 
hypothesized that the effect of IMF programs (W) differed by a child's age (X), they would 

algorithms, however, do not require such explicit programing. They estimate many different 
models -- possibly thousands -- using random cuts of the data, and thus suggest where impact 
heterogeneity is largest (Shiba et al. 2021). They produce such suggestions by providing a list 
of  variables  that  were  important  in  building  these  many  different  models.  Child  age,  for 
instance,  might  be  relevant  in  only  one  percent  of  these  many  models,  whereas  household 
wealth  might  have  been  used  50  percent  of  the  times.  Accordingly,  our  learning  algorithm 
will  provide  such  a  list  to  identify  the  most  important  variables  moderating  IMF  impact 
heterogeneity.  
 
Guarding  against  researcher  bias.  Learning  algorithms  guard  against  the  influence  of 
outliers,  p-hacking,  and  cherry-picking  results.  Although  this  capability  does  not  eradicate 
researcher discretion, it renders such bias less influential. Traditional regression procedures 
tend  to  use  all  the  data  simultaneously  to  generate  results.  Machine  learning  procedures, 
however,  split  the  data  into  training  and  testing  sets.  The  algorithm  is  first  applied  to  the 
training  set  to  find  optimal  regularization  parameters.  Then  the  same  model  is  used  on  the 
testing set to estimate the quantities of interest. This procedure finds an optimal balance in the 
bias-variance tradeoff (Hastie et al. 2009). We rely on this splitting procedure to produce our 
results.  
 
Flexible functional form. Learning algorithms find an optimal and flexible functional form. 
A model with a flexible functional form -- imagine adding more and more interaction terms to 
a simple OLS regression -- will eventually overfit the data. That is, the model will predict the 
given sample perfectly, implying that it will predict new data poorly. In machine learning, a 
regularization expression limits how flexible a model can become, thus balancing the trade-
off  between  bias  in-sample  and  variation  out-of-sample.  Selecting  optimal  regularization 
parameters, called empirical tuning, is done using cross-validation. This validation procedure 
involves  estimating  a  model  on  a  portion  of  the  sample,  and  then  evaluating  predictive 
performance in another sample. Such models have been used in a variety in applications in the 
social  and  behavioral  sciences  (Daoud,  Kim,  and  Subramanian  2019;  Kino  et  al.  2021). 
Relying  on  novel  methodological  developments  in  policy  evaluation,  we  select  a  function 
class called generalized random forest (Athey et al. 2019; Nie and Wager 2018).  

 

9 

2.3.3  Generalized random forest 

 

Generalized random forest (grf) adapts the family of random forest (RF) estimators (Breiman 
2001) for efficient non-parametric estimation of causal effects (Athey et al. 2019). RF models 
learn  ensembles  of  regression  (or  classification)  trees,  each  fit  a  different  resampled 
population and covariate set, to estimate and reduce model variance. Each tree learns a set of 
rules (e.g., Age > 5) which partition the population of units into different leaves of the tree. 
The predicted outcome for a new unit is the average of outcomes for observed units assigned 
to the same leaf; the prediction of the forest is the average of the predictions of all trees. A 
strength  of  non-parametric  (or  machine  learning)  estimators  such  as  RF  is  that  they  are 
designed to optimize predictive accuracy on held-out data by trading off bias and variance 
through regularization, rather than learning the parameters of a fixed-size model (Hastie et al. 
2009).  For  tree-based  estimators,  many  heuristic  regularization  strategies  exist,  including 
limiting  the  depth  or  number  of  leaf  nodes  in  each  tree.  Generally,  growing  more  trees  is 
preferable for out-of-sample generalization. In order to select such tuning parameters, we use 
sample splitting, evaluating the predictive accuracy on a randomly subsampled set of held-out 
data, never  exposed to the model. grf uses a version of sample splitting called "out-of-bag 
predictions." As it randomly picks a subset of cases from the full sample -- hence, the name 
random forest -- to grow each tree, it does not use all cases for all trees. Out-of-bag prediction 
applies  each  specific  case  to  only  those  trees  in  which  the  grf  did  not  sample  that  case  to 
grown those trees. This type of prediction is a more efficient way to use data.  

When machine learning is applied naïvely to policy evaluation design, the bias-variance trade-
off described above may induce regularization bias in treatment effects since minimization of 
predictive  error  is  agnostic  to  the  difference  between  a  treatment  variable  and  other 
covariates.  For  example,  regularized  generalized  linear  models  tend  to  prefer  smaller 
coefficients and may, therefore, bias treatment effects in either direction, depending on the 
correlation  between  treatment  and  covariates.  To  address  this  issue,  researchers  have 
developed so-called debiased machine learning estimators which decouple the estimation of 
treatment propensity and effect heterogeneity (Chernozhukov, Newey, and Robins 2018; Nie 
and Wager 2018). grf implements this structure through the R-learner framework, blending 
regression and propensity score methods to obtain debiased estimates of causal effects (Nie 
and Wager 2018). The  R-learner builds on the treatment effect decomposition of Robinson 
(1988)  which  relates  CATE  and  covariates  through  a  regression  of  a  transformed  outcome 
based on the observed treatment assignment. To achieve statistical efficiency, the R-learner 
draws on the strength of residualization, in which regressors are fit to residuals, rather than 
outcomes themselves. In particular, the R-learner first fits one model of treatment propensity 

𝐸𝐸[𝑇𝑇 𝑿𝑿]  and  one  of  marginal  effect 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌 𝑿𝑿].  To  obtain  de-biased  effect  estimates,  the 

residuals of these models are then explained by a third model -- a model of the CATE with 
respect to X. This approach is also called quasi-oracle estimation as it relies on fitting a model 
to imputations of the treatment effect for each unit. 

Once an estimate of CATE -- using all the covariates -- has been obtained, the population may 
be  clustered  at  different  levels  of  granularity  to  compile  average  treatment  effects  within 
groups.  grf  uses  cluster-robust  errors  that  ensures  that  the  standard  errors  are  computed 
correctly  and  that  they  are  less  sensitive  to  outliers.  In  our  study,  the  treatment -- IMF 
programs -- is  assigned  at  the  country-level.  Clustered  standard  errors  reflected  this 
uncertainty when estimating the quantities of interest. Additionally, we may be interested in 
the ATE stratified only by educational level. In this case, we average CATE predictions over 
all  individuals  in  each  stratum,  effectively  coarsening  our  view  of  treatment  effect 

 

10 

2.3.4  Handling selection bias 

Any observational study runs the risk of having the results contaminated by confounding. A 

heterogeneity. If the set of confounders includes more variables than education, this two-stage 
approach is necessary to deconfound treatment effect estimates. It has the added benefit that 
the  CATE  model  does  not  need  to  be  retrained  if  several  different  stratifications  are  of 
interest. 

As the exposures of interest 𝑊𝑊 are not randomized, our analysis is an observational study. 
confounding 𝑋𝑋  is  a  common  cause  to  both  the  exposure 𝑊𝑊  and  outcome 𝑌𝑌.  If  a  statistical 
analysis  does  not  adjust  for 𝑋𝑋,  the  results  will  likely  be  biased,  contaminated  by  spurious 

effects (Pearl 2012). Although selection into IMF programs (or individual policies) are not 
likely driven by children's education status, it may still be the case that governments select 
into  these  programs  because  its  population  lives  in  poverty.  And  poverty  and  lack  of 
education are closely related. Thus, we still require adjusting for a set of country- and family-
level confounders. Appendix A shows all sources and definitions.  
 
The  set  of  confounders  are  the  following.  GDP  growth:  societies  with  lower  economic 
growth are more likely to become economically constrained, and ask for IMF credit. Current 
account balance: the higher the fiscal imbalance, the more likely the country is to ask for 
IMF  help.  Log  GDP  per  capita:  low-income  countries  tend  to  seek  concessional  IMF 
assistance,  whereas  middle-income  countries  with  short-term  economic  disturbances 
following, for example, a currency crisis tend to ask for non-concessional loans. Trade: the 
sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured as a share of the gross domestic 
product.  Economic  globalization  index:  how  integrated  a  nation  is  in  the  global  economy 
will affect how many trade liberalization policies the IMF will aim to include in a program 
(Dreher 2006). High inflation indicator: a rapid price rise indicates structural imbalances in 
the economy. Negative growth: loss of GDP indicates economic downturn, not necessarily 
related  to  current  account  imbalances.  Although  we  adjusted  for  demographic  variables 
mainly  via  the  microdata,  our  analysis  includes  a  population-level  variable,  dependency 
ratio, measuring the ratio of the population aged 0 to 14 or 65 and older to the working-age 
population aged 15 to 64. This variable captures how much pressure the population exerts on 
public services. 
 
Our confounder set includes three measures for public spending: Education spending as a 
percentage  of  total  government  spending;  health  spending  as  a  percentage  of  total 
government  spending,  and;  total  government  spending,  as  percentage  of  GDP.  Public 
policies can be measured with spending measures and institutional qualitative indicators of 
policies (e.g., family policies, or unemployment insurance indicators) (Beckfield 2018). In the 
absence of complete institutional indicators, we selected public spending measures to capture 
how much resource governments allocate to public services that will directly affect children's 
likelihood of deprivation.  
 
We  include  central  political  and  institutional  measures  (Daoud  2015;  Halleröd  et  al.  2013; 
Rothstein  2014).  Democracy:  Autocratic  regimes  can  solicit  the  IMF's  advice  with  less 
political  cost  compared  to  societies  that  are  more  democratic.  Political  terror:  a  proxy 
measuring  how  likely  social  movements  could  mobilize  to  change  public  policies. 
Government  efficiency:  an  indirect  measure  of  how  effective  a  government  is  in 
implementing public policies. Corruption: more corruption is likely to divert resources from 
critical public services. Minimum age labor law: a binary variable indicating whether this 
law  is  in  place  regulating  child  labor.  During  economic  turmoil,  poorer  families  are  more 

 

11 

likely to let their children work. International war and Civil war: the IMF avoid countries 
engaged in conflict.  
 
However, at least one critical confounder is not directly observable: a government's political 
will to implement IMF programs. As these programs contain policies that are often difficult to 
implement, political will is an important driver  of selection bias. A government can opt to 
select  into  an  IMF  program  or  policy,  making  the  exposure  a  non-random  exposure 
assignment. As discussed in the Appendix, we us an Heckman selection model to indirectly 
measure political will.   
 

Results 

3 
3.1  Measuring IMF-education policy 
Of the 138 countries present in the IMF conditionality dataset, 50 countries had at least one 
IMF-education policy listed in their EBS document between the period 1985-2014. Of the 67 
countries in our sample, 39 had IMF programs. Of these 39, we find that 18 had at least one 
IMF-education  policy.  Counting  over  the  entire  period,  Sierra  Leone  received  most  IMF-
education policies: 23. These policies ranged from arguably small interventions -- in terms of 
its potential effect on children's prospects to complete school -- such as "complete and verify 
nationwide  teacher's  census"  listed  in  its  1997  program,  to  major  ones,  "Identify  and 
implement concrete measures to control the teacher's payroll budget" in its 2002 program.  
 
Our search identified a total of 137 IMF-education policies -- all listed in the Supplementary 
data. Although this is a small number compared to the over 50 000 conditions that the IMF 
has  issued,  even  one  IMF-education  policy  can  have  severe  implications  for  children's 
chances  for  completing  school  their  content.  In  Kenya  1989,  an  IMF-education  policy 
stipulated "fiscal measures in the context of the 1989/90 budget, including user charges in the 
health, education, and other sectors." In Bulgaria 2006, a policy required the "Implementation 
of an employment cut of at least 5,500 positions in the education sector." In Tajikistan 2004, 
the  IMF  wrote  "Reduce  the  number  of  employees  in  the  education  sector  by  5  percent." 
Moreover,  IMF-education  policies  affect  not  only  children  but  also  university  students.  In 
another  of  Kenya's  IMF  programs  in  2001,  a  policy  read,  "Implementation  of  tuition  and 
direct charges for university students as well as reduction in amount of the student loan." In 
Bolivia 2000, "Education: Develop a reform proposal for higher education in order to reduce 
the  share  of  public  resources  for  higher  education."  Consequently,  even  if  IMF-education 
policies  are  few  in  numbers,  when  implemented,  they  are  likely  to  have  profound 
consequences to children and university students.  
 
3.2  Evaluating  the  effect  of  IMF-education  policies  on  children's  chances  of 

completing school 

 
Based on the IMF-education policy data, we proceed to analyze the impact of IMF-education 
policies on children's educational prospects. The analysis will also evaluate the effect of IMF 
programs, revealing the extent to which it is educational policies or the set of all policies that 
affect  children.  Table  1  shows  the  raw  covariate  difference  between  children  living  in 
countries with an IMF program containing at least one IMF-education policy versus those that 
have no such programs. Similarly, Table 2 compares covariate balance by IMF program. For 

 

12 

both exposures, covariate balance is fairly comparable across the exposed and non-exposed 
groups.  
 

[Table 2 about here] 

 
Figure 2 panel (a), shows the ATE estimates for IMF-education policies and IMF programs. 
While  the  estimate  of  IMF-education  policy  has  an  adverse  effect  on  children's  education 
deprivation, the effect is not significant at a 95%-confidence interval. The estimate suggests 
an adverse increase in deprivation by about half a percentage point. One statistical reason for 
which the effect is insignificant is that the model is underpowered: the data contains only 14 
countries with at least on IMF-education policy. A substantive reason for the lack of effect is 
that IMF programs contain a slew of other policy conditions that dominate any potential effect 
of IMF-educational policies. Corroborating that reason, the model estimates an adverse IMF-
program effect of 6 percentage points (with a standard error of 0.028), shown in panel (b). 
This effect means that in a country with no IMF program and which would implement such a 
program will on average see an increase in children failing to complete school by a proportion 
of  six.  In  a  population with  100  children  and  zero  education  deprivation  to  before  an  IMF 
program, 6 children will fail after implementations. Thus, keeping the statistical caveat that 
the IMF-education data is possibly underpowered, our results show that IMF programs (as a 
set of policies) carry more political power to affect children's chances of completing school.  
 
Figure 3 shows the effect of IMF programs by children's age group.2 Following the trends of 
the two ATEs, these disaggregated effects reveal that IMF programs induce an adverse effect 
on  all  groups.  These  effects  range  from  9  (age  seven)  to  4  (age  eleven)  percentage  points: 
hovering around 5 points. For younger children (seven to eleven), our models cannot verify 
that their respective estimates are different from zero at a 95%-confidence interval. For older 
children (twelve to seventeen), the effects are significantly different from a zero estimate for 
children  aged  twelve  to  fourteen  and  sixteen;  for  the  fifteen-years  and  seven-years  old 
children,  the  effect  is  only  significant  at  a  90%-confidence  interval.  These  differences  in 
significance are likely to the power of the data -- the age-by-group samples are of different 
size.  As  presented  in  the  Discussion,  one  likely  explanation  to  this  finding -- that  IMF 
programs  are  likely  affecting  the  older  group  more  than  the  younger  one -- is  because  the 
education  system  for  older  children  required  more  resources  than  for  younger  children.  In 
times of austerity, governments likely restrain education spending.  
 
ATE estimates reveal informative child-population-wide trends, yet they mask how the effect 
varies  across  groups  of  children.  CATE  is  useful  for  unpacking  these  variations.  Figure  4 
shows  CATE  distribution  of  estimates  for  each  child  (across  all  ages),  revealing  a  wide 
variation across the IMF-program ATE. For some child subgroups, IMF programs are likely 
not affecting them (those around the red line) at all or even improving their situation (those 
below  the  redline).  To  better  understand  why  some  children,  react  differently  to  IMF 
programs, we analyze subgroups of children based on the five quantiles (i.e., quintiles) of the 
CATE distribution.  
 
A useful property of the GRF model is that it suggests which variables in the covariate set 
moderate most of the CATE distribution. Figure 5 shows the top-ranking moderators, their 

2 The IMF-education policy effect follows a similar but statistically weaker estimate and so the analysis show 
IMF program effects.  

 

 

13 

average  value,  and  their  variation  by  quintiles.  The  analysis  focuses  on  the  model  for 
seventeen-years-old children, as this group of children are the ones that policy changes are 
likely affect their living conditions, beyond completing school. They are the ones that are on 
the  verge  of  leaving  childhood  and  moving  into  adulthood -- with  all  the  complexities  that 
movement entails, from finding a job, shaping a new home, and forming a family. Completing 
this movement with or without an education makes a large difference.  
 
The seven top-ranking  moderators jointly capture  about 80 percent of the CATE variation. 
For this top group, Figure 5 start with listing the highest-ranking moderators and end with the 
lowest.  The  GRF  model  suggest  that  their  moderating  differences  are  small,  they  range  in 
about 7 to 10 in importance value. There are at least three striking observations. First, children 
with the highest impact -- those in fifth quantile (Q5) -- live in countries with high dependency 
ratio. A value of 82 for this ratio means that 82 percent of the population are between 0-14 or 
65  and  above.  As  our  sample  represents  low-  and  middle-income  countries  and  these 
countries  tend  to  have  a  young  population,  it  means  that  there  are  more  children  in  these 
countries  relative  to  adults.  The  more  children,  the  higher  the  likelihood  that  children  are 
affected by government cuts. While this finding is logical, the following two are not -- at first 
sight.  
 
 
Family  wealth  and  government's  education  spending  seems  to  have  a  reversed  moderating 
effect on the relationship between the exposure and outcome. Second, family wealth variable 
ranges  from  one  (poorest  families)  to  five  (wealthiest  families).  Families  with  a  material-
wealth value of 2.12 indicates that households with less resources are less affected by IMF 
programs  (first  quantile),  and  families  of  the  middle-class  with  a  value  of  3.05  are  most 
affected by IMF programs as they are in the fifth quantile of the CATE distribution. Third, 
governments that spend  more on their  education system prior to an  IMF program, are  also 
encountered with more children failing at school due to IMF programs.  
 
By revisiting the content of IMF-education policies, we form a logical explanation to these 
counterintuitive findings. While our model is unable to quantitatively verify an effect of IMF-
education  policies,  our  qualitative  analysis  provides  evidence  that  IMF-education  policies 
matter for children's chances of completing school.  
 
3.3  Qualitative  analysis  of  IMF-policy  documents:  the  link  between  IMF 

programs and children's educational outcomes. 

 
The counterintuitive effect heterogeneity shown in Figure 5 has a partly causal and a partly 
associative explanation. The associative explanation emphasizes that education spending only 
appears  to  causally  moderate  child-education  deprivation  during  IMF  programs,  when  this 
moderation is merely a noncausal correlation. Education spending likely coincides with one or 
several  unobserved  factors  that  also  produce  more  poor  deprivation  during  IMF  programs. 
One such unobserved factor is parents' unemployment status -- a variable we excluded from 
our  model  because  it  would  block  the  IMF  effect  as  it  is  a  post-exposure  variable.  Many 
governments  worldwide  endorse  the  importance  of  countercyclical  policies  (Stiglitz  2009). 
Consequently,  in  anticipating  the  onset  of  an  economic  crisis,  or  during  such  turmoil  but 
before the involvement of the IMF, governments are likely to have increased their education 
spending to cushion increasing rates of unemployment.  
 

 

14 

However,  when  the  IMF  becomes  involved,  high  education  spending  merely  appears 
correlated with education deprivation, even though unemployment causally explains both the 
increased  number  of  children  deprived  and  more  education  spending.  Therefore,  in  the 
presence of IMF programs, unemployment is likely a confounder in the relationship between 
high  education  spending  and  children's  education  outcomes.  In  estimating  the  total  IMF 
effect, our design controls for confounding in the causal relationship between IMF programs 
and education deprivation, not for confounding in the causal relationship between education 
spending and deprivation (VanderWeele 2015). To unravel this mediational effect, we would 
need a different research design -- a key task for future research. 
 
When we complement our statistical results with our qualitatively produced archival results, 
we  find  that  the  associative  explanation  cannot  fully  account  for  the  links  among  IMF 
programs, education spending, and education deprivation. To shed light on these links, based 
on our IMF-education-policy data, we further analyzed the content of IMF-policy documents 
for each country in our study. 
 
An archetypical example of an adverse IMF program is Tajikistan in 2000. In this program, 
the  IMF  and  the  government  agreed  to  "reduce  the  number  of  employees  in  the  education 
sector by 5 percent," aiming at increasing "the public sector wage bill by 28 percent" (IMF 
2003:13), including setting teachers' salaries "on a merit basis" (IMF 2003:14). However, this 
5 percent reduction turns out to merely constitute the beginning of a larger plan to entirely 
reform  the  education  system.  Indeed,  the  government  of  Tajikistan  committed  to  the 
following IMF policy adjustments: 
 

We will reduce the number of employees in the education sector by 30 percent over a 
period of three to five years. We will begin the process of downsizing by reducing the 
number of budgetary employees in the education sector by 5 percent as of July 2004 
(structural benchmark). Further, the plan will address reform of the education budget 
system  with  a  move  to  more  school  autonomy;  introduction  of  a  fee  schedule; 
expansion  of 
reform;  and  private  sector 
involvement. (IMF 2003:69)  

teaching  assignments;  curriculum 

Similarly, in Bolivia's 1999 program, IMF policies stipulated that the Bolivian government 
had to "develop a reform proposal for higher education in order to reduce the share of public 
resources  for  higher  education"  (IMF  1999:73).  The  reason  for  this  reform  was  that  the 
Bolivian  government  "had  done  little  to  smooth  income  distribution  [as…]  much  of 
government social spending fails to reach the poorest groups of society. A disproportionate 
share of public spending on education goes to universities" (IMF 1999:12). In other words, 
the  IMF  and  the  Bolivian  government  agreed  to  directly  target  low-income  families  by 
reallocating a portion of higher education spending in favor of rural-development programs 
(IMF  1999:62).  While  such  reforms  may  help  the  rural  population,  this  reform  adversely 
affects the middle class, because they attend higher-education at a higher rate than the poorer 
segments of society (Buchmann 1996; Daoud and Puaca 2011).  

Nonetheless, how does cutting higher-education funding at 𝑡𝑡−1 that affects mainly young 
adults (age ≥18), increase the probability of material deprivation for children between the 
ages 0 to 17 at 𝑡𝑡? One likely pathway is that these cuts affect young adults that are already 

attending,  or  planning  to  attend,  university  and  that  these  adults  also  have  children  that 
indirectly are affected by these cuts. In Bolivia, the IMF suggested "raising the tuition fees 
charged by universities." (IMF 1999:13). Raising fees put a financial burden on the families 

 

15 

of these young adults as they must start paying more for acquiring a university education than 
they did before the reform (Alexander 2001; Buchmann 1996). Consequently, such increased 
university fees affect adversely young adults and their children's risk of failing in school. 

Another likely pathway is via a sibling effect. Older siblings (above the age of 18) who would 
have  attended  higher  universities  now  choose  to  search  for  a  job  but  find  themselves 
unemployed instead. As the youth unemployment rate in low and middle-income countries is 
high (Banerjee and Duflo 2012), chances of finding a job is low (Buchmann 1996; Daoud and 
Puaca 2011). If the older sibling remains unemployed, then that indicates that the older sibling 
will likely not move out of his parents' home and has to keep sharing scarce resources with 
their  younger  sibling  (Daoud  2007,  2010,  2018;  Garfinkel,  McLanahan,  and  Wimer  2016). 
This sharing may burden the younger sibling by diverting resources away from them and thus 
increasing the younger sibling's risk of education deprivation. These observations reinforce 
our first key finding that IMF reforms affect the middle class at least as much as low-income 
families but through different causal pathways.  

Both  Tajikistan  and  Bolivia  spent  about  the  sample  average  (third  quantile)  on  education 
before selecting into IMF programs. The combination of spending on education, presence of 
IMF-education policies, and effect on child-education deprivation provide a clue to the likely 
causal relationship. In high- and medium-education spending countries, the IMF will likely 
identify  a  larger  fiscal  leeway  for  cutting  this  spending  to  balance  fiscal  deficit  than  for 
countries with low education spending. Subsequently, such cutting will increase deprivation. 
If  our  reasoning  holds  empirically,  it  would  suggest  that  low-education-spending  countries 
have fewer or no adverse IMF-education policies. Indeed, that is also what we find. 

In  some  countries  with  low  education  spending  before  IMF  program  enrollment,  such  as 
Gabon  and  Chad,  the  IMF  introduced  education  spending  floors.  In  Chad,  the  IMF  and 
government  officials  decided  that  they  would  "follow  pro-poor  expenditure  more  closely, 
indicative minimum targets are set for education and health current spending; a ceiling on the 
government's  total  wage  bill  is  also  set,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the  attainment  of  the 
program's fiscal objectives" (IMF 2001:19). These types of pro-poor policies, while paying 
attention  to  the  fiscal  ceiling,  are  common  in  low-income  countries  and  often  set  in 
collaboration  with  the  World  Bank.  Nonetheless,  Kentikelenis  et  al.  (2016)  find  that  these 
spending targets have low priority in the slew of other high-priority  IMF policies and thus 
tend to be inadequately implemented -- if at all. 

Discussion  

4 
Based on natural language processing, we identified the existence which IMF policies target a 
country's  education  system  (Åkerström  et  al.  2019;  Daoud,  Reinsberg,  et  al.  2019).  While 
IMF-education policies exist in several IMF programs, our statistical model finds no effect of 
these educational policies on children's probability of completing school. The lack of effect of 
IMF-education policies is likely driven by that these policies are dependent on the presence of 
an  IMF  program.  As  IMF-education  policies  cannot  exist  without  the  presence  of  an  IMF 
program, this dependence implies that statistically any IMF impact on children is mixed with 
other IMF policies. As IMF programs are dominated by macroeconomic policy conditions, it 
is  likely  that  these  conditions  drown  out  any  potential  direct  effect  from  IMF-education 
polices. But this dependence is a consequence of how IMF programs are designed: IMF and 
government officials design a program to mainly address critical macroeconomic issues rather 
than  issues  in  the  education  system.  Focusing  on  macroeconomics  will  therefore  affect  the 

 

16 

educational system via indirect channels, mainly reduced education spending. Nevertheless, 
as our archival analysis shows, albeit in small numbers, the IMF requires direct targeting the 
education system. This mix of direct and indirect targeting are likely the mechanisms through 
which  children  are  affected.  Consequently,  as  IMF-education  policies  are  predominately 
bundled into a set of other policies that make up an IMF programs, children are affected by 
the presence or absence of austerity rather  
 
Our analysis shows that IMF programs affect mainly children between the age of 12 to 17. 
Schooling for younger children, between the age of 7 and 11, is less resources heavy than for 
older children. These age groups that the model detects matches with the age groups countries 
use  around  the  world,  although  with  small  differences.  Maintained  by  the  United  Nations 
Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO),  the  International  Standard 
Classification of Education (ISCED) defines primary education as the education stage suitable 
for  children  from  age  six  to  twelve  and  secondary  education  for  children  in  the  age  range 
thirteen to nineteen. These thresholds matches well with our our households data that covers 
the  ages  seven  to  seventeen.  Compared  to  primary  education,  schooling  for  secondary 
education  requires  more  teachers  (often  with  higher  salary),  increasingly  expensive 
pedagogical material, and a variety of other educational resources. This makes schooling for 
older  children  more  dependent  on  sufficient  education  spending.  Thus,  a  government  must 
spend  considerable  amounts  to  maintain  high  educational  standards.  Despite  that  IMF-
education policies directly target the educational system, this finding -- that the older children 
rather than the younger are most effected by IMF programs -- substantiates the argument that 
it is the mix of direct and indirect policies aggravates children's risk of completing secondary 
school.  
 
 

5  References 
Abdullahi, Sadiq A. 2015. "Global Education." Pp. 793 -- 806 in Second International 

Handbook on Globalisation, Education and Policy Research, edited by J. Zajda. 
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. 

Åkerström, Joakim, Adel Daoud, and Richard Johansson. 2019. "Natural Language 

Processing in Policy Evaluation: Extracting Policy Conditions from IMF Loan 
Agreements." The 22nd Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics 5. 

Alexander, Nancy C. 2001. "Paying for Education: How the World Bank and the International 

Monetary Fund Influence Education in Developing Countries." Peabody Journal of 
Education 76(3 -- 4):285 -- 338. doi: 10.1080/0161956X.2001.9682002. 

Arpac, Ozlem, Graham Bird, and Alex Mandilaras. 2008. "Stop Interrupting: An Empirical 
Analysis of the Implementation of IMF Programs." World Development 36(9):1493 -- 
1513. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2007.09.001. 

Athey, Susan, and Guido W. Imbens. 2017. "The State of Applied Econometrics: Causality 

and Policy Evaluation." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2):3 -- 32. doi: 
10.1257/jep.31.2.3. 

Athey, Susan, Julie Tibshirani, and Stefan Wager. 2019. "Generalized Random Forests." The 

Annals of Statistics 47(2):1148 -- 78. doi: 10.1214/18-AOS1709. 

 

17 

Babb, Sarah. 2005. "The Social Consequences of Structural Adjustment: Recent Evidence and 

Current Debates." Annual Review of Sociology 31:199 -- 222. 

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2012. Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way 

to Fight Global Poverty. Reprint edition. New York: PublicAffairs. 

Beckfield, Jason. 2018. Political Sociology and the People's Health. Oxford: Oxford 

University Press. 

Breen, Richard, and Jan O. Jonsson. 2005. "Inequality of Opportunity in Comparative 
Perspective: Recent Research on Educational Attainment and Social Mobility." 
Annual Review of Sociology 31(1):223 -- 43. doi: 
10.1146/annurev.soc.31.041304.122232. 

Breiman, Leo. 2001. "Random Forests." Machine Learning 45(1):5 -- 32. doi: 

10.1023/A:1010933404324. 

Buchmann, Claudia. 1996. "The Debt Crisis, Structural Adjustment and Women's 

Education." International Journal of Comparative Sociology 37(1):5 -- 30. doi: 
10.1163/002071596X00208. 

Chernozhukov, Victor, Whitney Newey, and James Robins. 2018. "Double/De-Biased 

Machine Learning Using Regularized Riesz Representers." ArXiv:1802.08667 [Econ, 
Math, Stat]. 

Conklin, Annalijn I., Adel Daoud, Riti Shimkhada, and Ninez A. Ponce. 2018. "The Impact of 

Rising Food Prices on Obesity in Women: A Longitudinal Analysis of 31 Low-
Income and Middle-Income Countries from 2000 to 2014." International Journal of 
Obesity 1. doi: 10.1038/s41366-018-0178-y. 

Corsi, Daniel J., Melissa Neuman, Jocelyn E. Finlay, and S. V. Subramanian. 2012. 

"Demographic and Health Surveys: A Profile." International Journal of Epidemiology 
41(6):1602 -- 13. doi: 10.1093/ije/dys184. 

Daoud, Adel. 2007. "(Quasi)Scarcity and Global Hunger." Journal of Critical Realism 

6(2):199 -- 225. doi: 10.1558/jocr.v6i2.199. 

Daoud, Adel. 2010. "Robbins and Malthus on Scarcity, Abundance, and Sufficiency." 

American Journal of Economics and Sociology 69(4):1206 -- 29. doi: 10.1111/j.1536-
7150.2010.00741.x. 

Daoud, Adel. 2015. "Quality of Governance, Corruption, and Absolute Child Poverty in 

India." Journal of South Asian Development 10(2):1 -- 20. 

Daoud, Adel. 2018. "Unifying Studies of Scarcity, Abundance, and Sufficiency." Ecological 

Economics 147:208 -- 17. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2018.01.019. 

Daoud, Adel, and Devdatt Dubhashi. 2020. "Statistical Modeling: The Three Cultures." 

ArXiv:2012.04570 [Cs, Stat]. 

Daoud, Adel, and Devdatt Dubhashi. 2021. "Melting Together Prediction and Inference." 

Observational Studies 7(1):1 -- 7. 

 

18 

Daoud, Adel, Anders Herlitz, and S. V. Subramanian. 2020. "Combining Distributive Ethics 
and Causal Inference to Make Trade-Offs between Austerity and Population Health." 
ArXiv:2007.15550 [Econ, q-Fin]. 

Daoud, Adel, and Fredrik Johansson. 2020. "Estimating Treatment Heterogeneity of 

International Monetary Fund Programs on Child Poverty with Generalized Random 
Forest." SocArXiv. doi: osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/awfjt. 

Daoud, Adel, Rockli Kim, and S. V. Subramanian. 2019. "Predicting Women's Height from 

Their Socioeconomic Status: A Machine Learning Approach." Social Science & 
Medicine 238:112486. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112486. 

Daoud, Adel, Elias Nosrati, Bernhard Reinsberg, Alexander E. Kentikelenis, Thomas H. 

Stubbs, and Lawrence P. King. 2017. "Impact of International Monetary Fund 
Programs on Child Health." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
114(25):6492 -- 97. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1617353114. 

Daoud, Adel, and Goran Puaca. 2011. "An Organic View of Students' Want Formation: 
Pragmatic Rationality, Habitus and Reflexivity." British Journal of Sociology of 
Education 32(4):603 -- 22. doi: 10.1080/01425692.2011.578440. 

Daoud, Adel, Bernhard Reinsberg, Alexander E. Kentikelenis, Thomas H. Stubbs, and 

Lawrence P. King. 2019. "The International Monetary Fund's Interventions in Food 
and Agriculture: An Analysis of Loans and Conditions." Food Policy 83:204 -- 18. doi: 
10.1016/j.foodpol.2019.01.005. 

Deaton, Angus. 2015. The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality. 

Reprint edition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Dreher, Axel. 2005. "Does the IMF Influence Fiscal and Monetary Policy?" The Journal of 

Policy Reform 8(3):225 -- 38. doi: 10.1080/13841280500181726. 

Dreher, Axel. 2006. "Does Globalization Affect Growth? Evidence from a New Index of 

Globalization." Applied Economics 38(10):1091 -- 1110. doi: 
10.1080/00036840500392078. 

Garfinkel, Irwin, Sara McLanahan, and Christopher Wimer. 2016. Children of the Great 

Recession. New York: Ruseel Sage Foundation. 

Gordon, David, Shailen Nandy, Christina Pantazis, Simon Pemberton, and Peter Townsend. 

2003. Child Poverty in the Developing World. Bristol, UK: Polity Press. 

Halleröd, Björn, Bo Rothstein, Adel Daoud, and Shailen Nandy. 2013. "Bad Governance and 
Poor Children: A Comparative Analysis of Government Efficiency and Severe Child 
Deprivation in 68 Low-and Middle-Income Countries." World Development 48:19 -- 31. 

Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. 2009. The Elements of Statistical 

Learning. 2 edition. Springer New York. 

Heckman, James J. 1979. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error." Econometrica 

47(1):153 -- 61. 

 

19 

Hill, Jennifer L. 2011. "Bayesian Nonparametric Modeling for Causal Inference." Journal of 
Computational and Graphical Statistics 20(1):217 -- 40. doi: 10.1198/jcgs.2010.08162. 

IEO. 2003. Fiscal Adjustment in IMF-Supported Programs. Washington DC: IMF 

Independent Evaluation Office. 

IEO. 2007. Structural Conditionality in IMF-Supported Programs -- Background Documents. 

Washington DC: IMF Independent Evaluation Office. 

IMF. 1999. Bolivia-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and Request for Second 
Annual Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (EBS/99/235). 
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 

IMF. 2001. Chad-Second Review Under the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty 

Reduction and Growth Facility (EBS/01/64). Washington, DC: International Monetary 
Fund. 

IMF. 2003. Republic of Tajikistan-Second Review Under the Three-Year Arrangement Under 
the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, and Request for a Waiver of Performance 
Criterion (EBS/03/171). Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 

Jockers, Matthew L. 2014. Text Analysis with R for Students of Literature. Cham: Springer 

International Publishing. 

Kentikelenis, Alexander, Thomas H. Stubbs, and Lawrence P. King. 2016. "IMF 

Conditionality and Development Policy Space, 1985 -- 2014." Review of International 
Political Economy 23(0):543 -- 82. doi: 10.1080/09692290.2016.1174953. 

Kino, Shiho, Yu-Tien Hsu, Koichiro Shiba, Yung-Shin Chien, Carol Mita, Ichiro Kawachi, 

and Adel Daoud. 2021. "A Scoping Review on the Use of Machine Learning in 
Research on Social Determinants of Health: Trends and Research Prospects." SSM - 
Population Health 15:100836. doi: 10.1016/j.ssmph.2021.100836. 

Künzel, Sören R., Jasjeet S. Sekhon, Peter J. Bickel, and Bin Yu. 2018. "Meta-Learners for 

Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Using Machine Learning." 
ArXiv:1706.03461 [Math, Stat]. 

Moosa, Imad A., and Nisreen Moosa. 2019. "The Effects of IMF Operations on Social 

Expenditure." Pp. 111 -- 34 in Eliminating the IMF. Springer. 

Moser, Christoph, and Jan-Egbert Sturm. 2011. "Explaining IMF Lending Decisions after the 

Cold War." The Review of International Organizations 6(3 -- 4):307 -- 40. doi: 
10.1007/s11558-011-9120-y. 

Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Jann Spiess. 2017. "Machine Learning: An Applied Econometric 

Approach." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2):87 -- 106. doi: 
10.1257/jep.31.2.87. 

Nandy, Shailen, Adel Daoud, and David Gordon. 2016. "Examining the Changing Profile of 

Undernutrition in the Context of Food Price Rises and Greater Inequality." Social 
Science & Medicine 149:153 -- 63. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.11.036. 

 

20 

Neumayer, Eric, and Thomas Plümper. 2017. Robustness Tests for Quantitative Research. 
Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press. 

Nie, Xinkun, and Stefan Wager. 2018. "Quasi-Oracle Estimation of Heterogeneous Treatment 

Effects." ArXiv:1712.04912 [Econ, Math, Stat]. 

Nielsen, H. Dean. 2006. From Schooling Access to Learning Outcomes: An Unfinished 

Agenda: An Evaluation of World Bank Support to Primary Education. Washington 
D.C.: World Bank Independent Evaluation Group. 

Pearl, Judea. 2012. "The Causal Foundations of Structural Equation Modeling." P. 740 in 

Handbook of Structural Equation Modeling, edited by R. H. Hoyle. New York: The 
Guilford Press. 

Ponce, Ninez, Riti Shimkhada, Amy Raub, Adel Daoud, Arijit Nandi, Linda Richter, and Jody 

Heymann. 2017. "The Association of Minimum Wage Change on Child Nutritional 
Status in LMICs: A Quasi-Experimental Multi-Country Study." Global Public Health 
13(9):1 -- 15. doi: 10.1080/17441692.2017.1359327. 

Robinson, P. M. 1988. "Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression." Econometrica 

56(4):931 -- 54. doi: 10.2307/1912705. 

Rothstein, Bo. 2011. The Quality of Government: Corruption, Social Trust, and Inequality in 

International Perspective. Chicago; London: University of Chicago Press. 

Rothstein, Bo. 2014. "The Chinese Paradox of High Growth and Low Quality of Government: 

The Cadre Organization Meets Max Weber." Governance. doi: 10.1111/gove.12128. 

Rutstein, S. O. 2008. The DHS Wealth Index: Approaches for Rural and Urban Areas. 

popline.org. 

Sen, Amartya. 1999. Development as Freedom. 1st. ed. New York: Knopf. 

Shiba, Koichiro, Adel Daoud, Hiroyuki Hikichi, Aki Yazawa, Jun Aida, Katsunori Kondo, 

and Ichiro Kawachi. 2021. "Heterogeneity in Cognitive Disability after a Major 
Disaster: A Natural Experiment Study." Science Advances. doi: 
10.1126/sciadv.abj2610. 

Stiglitz, Joseph. 2009. "Global Crisis, Social Protection and Jobs, The." International Labour 

Review 148(1 -- 2). 

Stubbs, Thomas, Bernhard Reinsberg, Alexander Kentikelenis, and Lawrence King. 2018. 
"How to Evaluate the Effects of IMF Conditionality." The Review of International 
Organizations. doi: 10.1007/s11558-018-9332-5. 

Stuckler, David, and Sanjay Basu. 2013. The Body Economic: Why Austerity Kills : 

Recessions, Budget Battles, and the Politics of Life and Death. 

Teorell, Jan, Stefan Dahlberg, Holmberg Sören, Rothstein Bo, Natalia Alvarado Pachon, and 

Richard Svensson. 2018. The Quality of Government Standard Dataset, Version 
Jan18. University of Gothenburg. The Quality of Government Institute. 

 

21 

USAID. 2011. MEASURE DHS: Demographic and Health Surveys - Quality Information to 
Plan, Monitor, and Improve Population, Health, and Nutrition Programs. Calverton, 
USA: U.S. Agency for International Development. 

VanderWeele, Tyler. 2015. Explanation in Causal Inference: Methods for Mediation and 

Interaction. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. 

Vreeland, James Raymond. 2007. The International Monetary Fund: Politics of Conditional 

Lending. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 

 

6  Tables 
 
Table 1. Covariate balance stratified by IMF exposure status 

 

n 

Child age (mean (sd)) 

Child sex = Male (%) 

IMF = 0 

985805 

IMF =1 

955929 

8.27 (5.06) 

8.08 (5.07) 

501117 (50.8) 

483457 (50.6) 

Urban household = rural (%) 

613439 (62.2) 

603594 (63.1) 

Family wealth (%) 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

256662 (26.0) 

 
223967 (23.4) 

192713 (19.5) 

192630 (20.2) 

187835 (19.1) 

190872 (20.0) 

170723 (17.3) 

173794 (18.2) 

177872 (18.0) 

174666 (18.3) 

Nr of children (mean (sd)) 

3.77 (2.44) 

4.04 (3.21) 

Nr of adults (mean (sd)) 

2.91 (1.87) 

2.97 (2.42) 

Head of household education (%) 

   noEducation 

   Primary 

314602 (31.9) 

273742 (28.6) 

360369 (36.6) 

330722 (34.6) 

 

22 

   SecondaryPlus 

310834 (31.5) 

351465 (36.8) 

Year of interview (mean (sd)) 

2003.49 (3.68)  2003.35 (2.72) 

Health spending (mean (sd)) 

8.32 (5.61) 

10.03 (3.51) 

Democracy (mean (sd)) 

5.12 (3.23) 

5.89 (2.01) 

Trade (mean (sd)) 

66.07 (39.99) 

56.73 (27.38) 

Expenses balance (mean (sd)) 

-2.29 (6.31) 

-3.40 (2.79) 

Economic develop (mean (sd)) 

6.51 (0.86) 

6.09 (0.85) 

War (mean (sd)) 

0.13 (0.80) 

0.21 (0.90) 

Dependency ratio (mean (sd)) 

76.07 (11.95) 

80.31 (12.89) 

Negative growth (mean (sd)) 

6.99 (6.82) 

5.04 (2.58) 

Inflation (mean (sd)) 

0.10 (0.29) 

0.05 (0.22) 

Education spending (mean (sd)) 

12.80 (5.97) 

15.15 (5.06) 

Economic globalization (mean (sd)) 

41.26 (13.59) 

39.88 (13.12) 

Gov. effectiveness (mean (sd)) 

-0.53 (0.60) 

-0.66 (0.36) 

Political terror (mean (sd)) 

3.64 (0.91) 

3.22 (0.97) 

Corruption (mean (sd)) 

-0.66 (0.47) 

-0.80 (0.46) 

Child labor law (mean (sd)) 

0.51 (0.50) 

0.62 (0.49) 

Public spending (mean (sd)) 

24.35 (8.44) 

22.12 (8.22) 

 

 

 

 

23 

 
Table 2 Covariate balance stratified by IMF-education exposure status 

IMF-education = 0  IMF-education =1 
 
939576 
n 
0.14 (0.35) 
Education deprivation (mean (SD)) 
11.73 (3.11) 
Child age (mean (SD)) 
475713 (50.6) 
Child sex = Male (%) 
589826 (62.8) 
Urban household = rural (%) 
Family wealth (%) 
 
226930 (24.2) 
   1 
182837 (19.5) 
   2 
182537 (19.4) 
   3 
169102 (18.0) 
   4 
178170 (19.0) 
   5 
3.95 (2.86) 
Nr of children (mean (SD)) 
3.00 (2.21) 
Nr of adults (mean (SD)) 
Head education (%) 
 
276459 (29.4) 
   noEducation 
338164 (36.0) 
   Primary 
324953 (34.6) 
   SecondaryPlus 
2003.66 (3.36) 
Year of interview (mean (SD)) 
8.78 (4.67) 
Health spending (mean (SD)) 
5.72 (2.70) 
Democracy (mean (SD)) 
62.85 (35.37) 
Trade (mean (SD)) 
-3.42 (4.73) 
Expenses balance (mean (SD)) 
6.32 (0.88) 
Economic develop (mean (SD)) 
0.19 (0.90) 
War (mean (SD)) 
76.64 (12.64) 
Dependency ratio (mean (SD)) 
5.21 (2.44) 
Negative growth (mean (SD)) 
0.08 (0.27) 
Inflation (mean (SD)) 
-0.14 (0.50) 
Political will (mean (SD)) 
Education spending (mean (SD)) 
14.48 (5.50) 
Economic globalization (mean (SD))  41.13 (12.95) 
Gov effectivness (mean (SD)) 
-0.54 (0.48) 
3.39 (0.89) 
Political terror (mean (SD)) 
-0.72 (0.48) 
Corruption (mean (SD)) 
Child labor law (mean (SD)) 
0.53 (0.50) 
23.54 (8.71) 
Public spending (mean (SD)) 
0.41 (0.49) 
IMF program (mean (SD)) 
Countries with IMF (mean (SD)) 
58.25 (8.27) 
0.62 (0.05) 
UN vote G7 (mean (SD)) 
IMFeduc (mean (SD)) 
0.00 (0.00) 

181460 
0.16 (0.36) 
11.68 (3.11) 
91907 (50.6) 
104569 (57.6) 
 
42841 (23.6) 
35725 (19.7) 
35557 (19.6) 
32248 (17.8) 
35089 (19.3) 
4.19 (2.70) 
2.88 (1.74) 
 
62645 (34.5) 
60226 (33.2) 
58589 (32.3) 
2002.83 (2.41) 
11.84 (3.80) 
5.40 (2.22) 
52.52 (31.85) 
-2.43 (1.92) 
6.28 (0.93) 
0.00 (0.00) 
80.90 (12.02) 
5.83 (2.13) 
0.08 (0.27) 
0.15 (0.43) 
13.59 (3.38) 
41.53 (14.18) 
-0.59 (0.37) 
3.48 (1.12) 
-0.65 (0.41) 
0.66 (0.47) 
21.84 (6.60) 
0.93 (0.25) 
62.45 (6.79) 
0.62 (0.05) 
1.00 (0.00) 

24 

 

 

7  Figures 
 

Figure 1. Global distribution of child-education deprivation. Notes: we calculated country averages from the DHS and MICS 

micro data for each of the 67 nations included in the sample. White colored countries are not included in the sample.  

 

 

25 

 

 

Panel a 
 
 

Panel b 
 
Figure 2: ATE for IMF-education policy 
 
 

 

26 

Figure 3: ATE for IMF program by child age 
 

 

Figure 4: CATE distribution for all children (age 7-17) 
 
 

 

 

27 

Figure 5: Group characteristics by quantile ATE for IMF program by child age 
 

 

8  Appendix 
8.1  Appendix A: Measures 

Variable 

Definition 

Country-level 

 

variables 

Source 

 

Health spending 

Measured  as  a  share  of  GDP,  and  as  a  share  of  total 

IMF, 

2011, 

and  World 

government expenditures.  

Development Indicators 

IMF program 

Dummy variable produced by the IMF: 'the starting year 

IMF, 2011. 

of  an  IMF-supported  program  [is  defined]  as  the  year  in 

which the program was approved, provided this occurred 

in the first half of the year. If the approval date was in the 

second half of the year, the starting year is the following 

year.  The  end  year  is  the  year  in  which  the  program 

 

28 

expired.' 

GDP per capita 

Gross domestic product per capita (constant 2000 USD)  --  

WDI, Sep. 2012. 

logged (to correct for the skewed distribution). 

Government 

General  government  balance  (share  of  GDP).  Calculated 

Authors' calculation using IMF-

balance 

by  subtracting  general  government  expenditure  from 

WEO data. 

general government revenue. 

High inflation 

Dummy  variable:  =  1  if  year-to-year  change  in  inflation 

Authors' calculation using IMF-

over 20%, 0 otherwise.  

WEO data. 

Dependency ratio 

Combined  shares  of  populations  aged  0-14  and  65  and 

Authors' 

calculations 

using 

above. 

WDI data. 

Trade 

Trade  is  the  sum  of  exports  and  imports  of  goods  and 

WDI, Sep. 2012 

services measured as a share of gross domestic product. 

Democracy 

Democracy,  Range:  0-10 

(Freedom  House/Imputed 

Quality 

of 

Governance 

Polity).  Average  of  Freedom  House  and  Polity 

Database, 2011. 

(transformed to a scale 0-10). Hadenius & Teorell (2005) 

show that this average index performs better both in terms 

of validity and reliability than its constituent parts. 

Negative growth 

Dummy variable: = 1 if negative growth in a given year, 0 

Authors' calculation using IMF-

otherwise.  

ODA 

Net ODA received (% of GNI). 

WEO data. 

WDI, Sep. 2012 

Low income country  Dummy  variable.  Country  is  eligible  for  concessional 

IMF, 2011 

lending from the IMF 

Sub-Saharan Africa  Dummy variable. Refers to countries located south of the 

World Development Indicators 

Sahara Desert.  

Civil war 

Magnitude score of episode(s) of civil warfare 

Center for Systemic Peace 

 

29 

Education 

Public education spending as a percentage of GDP 

Clements,  Gupta  &  Nozaki 

expenditure  (%  of 

GDP) 

2011,  What  happens  to  social 

spending 

in 

IMF-Supported 

programs?  

 

Education 

Public  education  spending  as  a  percentage  of  total 

Clements,  Gupta  &  Nozaki 

expenditure  (%  of 

government spending 

gov. spending) 

2011,  What  happens  to  social 

spending 

in 

IMF-Supported 

programs? 

Economic 

The  KOF  Globalisation  Index  measures  the  economic, 

Economic  globalization,  Dreher 

globalization 

social and political dimensions of globalisation. 

2006, 

KOF 

Index 

of 

Globalization  (Version:  March 

2016) 

Government 

effectiveness 

"Combines into a single measure of the quality of public 

Interpolated,  World 

Bank, 

service  provision,  the  quality  of  the  bureaucracy,  the 

Worldwide 

Governance 

competence of civil servants, the independence of the civil 

Indicators  

service from political pressures, and the credibility of the 

government's commitment to policies. The index focus on 

the  "inputs"  required  for  the  government  to  be  able  to 

produce  and  implement  good  policies  and  deliver  public 

goods". (Teorell et al. 2018) 

Corruption 

"measures  perceptions  of  corruption,  defined  as  the 

Interpolated,  World 

Bank, 

exercise  of  public  power  for  private  gain.  It  measures 

Worldwide 

Governance 

aspects  of  corruption  ranging  from  the  frequency  of 

Indicators. 

"additional payments to get things done", to the effects of 

corruption  on  the  business  environment,  to  measuring 

"grand corruption" in the political arena or in the tendency 

of elite forms to engage in "state capture". (Teorell et al. 

2018) 

 

30 

Political terror 

Measures political terror on a scale 1 to 5, where 5 is the 

Political  terror  scale  (U.S.  State 

most  severe  form  of  terror.  This  level  is  defined  as, 

Department), Gibney, Cornett & 

"Terror has expanded to the whole population. The leaders 

Wood  2013,  Political  Terror 

of  these  societies  place  no  limits  on  the  means  or 

Scale.. 

thoroughness  with  which 

they  pursue  personal  or 

ideological goals" (Teorell et al. 2018) 

Minimum  age  labor 

Dummy variable: = 1 a law in place regulating minimum 

Minimum  Age  Convention, 

law 

required working age , 0 otherwise 

1973  (No.  138),  International 

Labour  Organization 

(ILO), 

Information 

System 

on 

International  Labour  Standards 

(NORMLEX)  (Retrieved  2014: 

http://www.ilo.org/normlex 

Government 

Government expenditure (Percent of GDP) 

IMF  in  Quality  of  Governance 

spending 

Family-level 

 

variables 

Database, 2011 

 

Nr children 

Number of individuals under the age of 18 

Demographic 

and 

Health 

Nr of Adults 

Number of individuals over the age of 18 

Demographic 

and 

Health 

Survey;  Multiple 

Indicator 

Cluster Survey 

Survey;  Multiple 

Indicator 

Cluster Survey 

Education 

Ordinal variable (no education, primary, and secondary+). 

Demographic 

and 

Health 

Measures the head of household's level of education.  

Survey;  Multiple 

Indicator 

Wealth index 

Ordinal  variable  (Quintiles).  The  index  is  a  composite 

Demographic 

and 

Health 

measure  of  the  household's  material  standard.  It  is 

Survey;  Multiple 

Indicator 

calculated  from  selected  assets  such  as  ownership  of 

Cluster Survey. (Rutstein 2008) 

Cluster Survey 

 

31 

television, mobile phones, bicycles.  

Urban rural 

Dummy  variables.  Captures  the  geographical  location  of 

Demographic 

and 

Health 

households.  

Survey;  Multiple 

Indicator 

Child-level variables 

 

Cluster Survey 

 

Severe  child  health 

Dummy variable. Children under the age of 5 who had not 

Demographic 

and 

Health 

deprivation 

been  immunized  against  diseases  or  had  a  recent  illness 

Survey;  Multiple 

Indicator 

involving  diarrhea  and  had  not  received  any  medical 

Cluster  Survey.  (Gordon  et  al. 

advice or treatment two weeks prior to the survey 

2003:8) 

Sex of the child 

Dummy variable.  

Age 

Age of the child in number of years. 

Demographic 

and 

Health 

Survey;  Multiple 

Indicator 

Cluster Survey 

Demographic 

and 

Health 

Survey;  Multiple 

Indicator 

Cluster Survey 

 

 
8.2  Appendix B: Heckman Selection model 
Governments select into IMF programs. This produces selection bias where countries that are 
rapidly  getting  poorer  might  be  more  likely  to  cooperate  with  the  IMF.  If  so,  increases  in 
poverty  would  be  correlated  with  IMF  intervention,  even  if  the  intervention  did  not  cause 
increases in poverty. While observable variables affecting both selection into an IMF program 
and child poverty are already included as controls in our model, we cannot directly control for 
unobservable factors such as 'political will', as outlined in our DAG. 
 
Four approaches have been used in the IMF program evaluation literature to address this type 
of  selection  bias:  matching  methods;  instrumental  variable  approaches;  system  GMM 
estimation; and Heckman selection models. For our purposes, Heckman's two-step method is 
the  most  suitable  choice  to  address  concerns  of  selection  bias  as  it  produces  a  proxy  for 
unobserved factors that we can include into our set of controls. The Heckman model involves 
first  modelling  IMF  participation,  and  second  modelling  the  outcome  of  interest  using  the 
inverse  Mills  ratio  from  the  first  step.  Accordingly,  in  the  first  step,  we  estimate  a  probit 
model to predict the likelihood of IMF participation: 

 

 

32 

 

As a point of reference, we rely on a version of the specification suggested by the Independent 
Evaluation Office of the IMF (IEO 2003): one that retain the best data coverage but which 

still gives analogous results. The outcome variable, 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑓𝑓.𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑔𝑔.𝑐𝑐𝑔𝑔𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡, measures if country k 

had an IMF program at year t. Our choice of which central mechanism affect selection into 
programs, builds on Moser and Strum's suggestions (Moser and Sturm 2011): 

 

 

 

•  Previous IMF participation (imf.prog.cgn, t-1): a country's past involvement with the 
IMF tend to positively determine future program participation. The nearer historically, 
the more likely participation is. We use whether the country had a program last year.  
•  GDP growth (gdp.growth): Countries with lower growth  are more likely to become 

economically constrained, and ask for IMF credit.  

•  Current account balance (cab.gdp as share of GDP): One of the key objective of the 
IMF  is  to  support  countries  to  overcome  balance  of  payment  issues  deriving  from 
trade. The higher the imbalance, the more likely the country is to ask for IMF help.  

•  Democracy  (demo.fhpol):  Autocratic  regimes  can  with  less  political  cost  invite  the 

IMF, compared to more democratic countries.  

• 

•  Log GDP per capita (lngdppc): low income countries tend to seek concessional IMF 
assistance, whereas middle income countries with short term economic disturbances 
(e.g. currency crisis) tend to ask for non-concessional loans (e.g. Brazil, Argentina).  

•  Civil war (civilwar): Even if countries with a high degree of domestic civil conflict 
might  need  more  economic  help,  the  IMF  might  avoid  involvement  during  violent 
periods. Also, the political cost to call for IMF assistance might be high.  
International war (int.war): Countries involved in armed conflicts between sovereign 
nations deters the IMF.  

•  UN votes with G7 (UN vote G7): this variable captures how often countries vote in 

line with G7. This shows political proximity with the key nations driving the IMF.   

•  Countries  on  IMF  programs  (CountriesWithIMF):  In  any  given  year,  the  more 
countries that have IMF funding, the less likely the IMF is to issue new programs as 
its funds are limited.  
 

The total number of countries on IMF programmes and UN voting patterns with G7 act as our 
exclusion restrictions: these variable explain significantly the country's participation decision 
in IMF programs but are not correlated with the dependent variable of the outcome equation, 
in our case child poverty. Voting pattern has stronger relevance as it is significantly correlated 
in all alternative selection specifications. 

We  choose  not  to  include  government  balance  (lagged  one  year)  as  it  reduced  many 
observations due to missing data. We would lose 6 countries reducing our data size by 10%. 
We calculate the inverse Mills ratio and include it in the outcome equation to control for the 
remaining  unobserved  variation  (Heckman  1979).  The  equation  below  defines  the  inverse 

Mills ratio, 𝜆𝜆, which isolates unobserved factors determining IMF participation: 

 

 

33 

 

 
The Mills ratio is calculated for each observation: country k at time point t, and depending on 

their treatment status 𝑇𝑇𝑗𝑗 (present or absent IMF program). The function 𝜙𝜙 denotes the standard 
normal  density  function,  and Φ  the  standard  normal  cumulative  distribution  function; 𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 
represents the covariates and 𝛾𝛾^ are the vector of estimated parameter from the first equation. 
The inverse Mills ratio, 𝜆𝜆, is then used as a covariate, in the outcome equation (in our case, 

the  multilevel  models  with  child  poverty  as  outcomes)  controlling  for  self-selection.  In  a 
linear  model,  its  coefficient  is  interpreted  as  follows:  if  significantly  negative,  then 
unobserved  variables  that  make  IMF  participation  more  likely  are  associated  with  lower 
government health expenditure; if significantly positive, then unobserved variables that make 
IMF participation more  likely are associated with higher government health expenditure; if 
non-significant, then there is no association. 
 
Alternative selection specifications 
 

IMF program (t-1) 

GDP growth (t-1) 

Current account balance (t-1) 

Dependent variable 
IMF program (t) 

 
 
M2 

M3  

M1  

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

1.910***  1.959*** 
(0.064) 
(0.094) 
-0.018***  -0.042***  -0.026*** 
(0.009) 
(0.006) 
(0.010) 
-0.007* 
-0.008* 
-0.008 
(0.005) 
(0.004) 
(0.005) 
0.033*  0.046*** 
0.027** 
(0.013) 
(0.019) 
(0.016) 
-0.256***  -0.253***  -0.336*** 
(0.054) 
(0.034) 
0.004 
(0.004) 
0.030 
(0.054) 

(0.053) 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

-0.026 
(0.035) 
0.042 
(0.072) 

 

0.042 
(0.069) 
-0.213 
(0.156) 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

-0.002 
(0.004) 
0.001 
0.006 
(0.005) 
(0.005) 
1.041*  3.303*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Democracy (t-1) 

Log GDP per capita (t-1) 

Log aid per capita (t-1) 

 
 
Civil war (t-1) 
 
 

International war (t-1) 

Dependency ratio (t-1) 

Countries on IMF programs 

UN voting pattern with G7 

0.011*** 
(0.004) 
0.886** 

 

34 

Constant 

 
 

 
 

Observations 
Log Likelihood 
Akaike Inf. Crit. 
Note: probit models 
 
 

 

 

 

(0.546) 
-0.418 
(0.478) 
1,264 

 

 

 
 

(0.419) 
-0.570* 
(0.309) 
2,482 

(0.686) 
-0.130 
(0.741) 
1,066 
-1,000.302 -471.559  -631.869 
2,020.605  963.118  1,283.739 
 
*p <0.1, **p<0.05,p***p<0.01 

 

35 

