A Literature Review on Length of Stay Prediction for Stroke 
Patients using Machine Learning and Statistical Approaches 

Ola Alkhatib1 and Ayman Alahmar2 

1Department of Computer Science, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada 

2Department of Software Engineering, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada 

Abstract  Hospital  length  of  stay  (LOS)  is  one  of  the  most  essential  healthcare  metrics  that 
reflects the hospital quality of service and helps improve hospital scheduling and management. 
LOS prediction helps in cost management because patients who remain in hospitals usually do 
so in hospital units where resources are severely limited. In this study, we reviewed papers on 
LOS  prediction  using  machine  learning  and  statistical  approaches.  Our  literature  review 
considers  research  studies  that  focus  on  LOS  prediction  for  stroke  patients.  Some  of  the 
surveyed studies revealed that authors reached contradicting conclusions. For example, the age 
of the patient was considered an important predictor of LOS for stroke patients in some studies, 
while  other  studies  concluded  that  age  was  not  a  significant  factor.  Therefore,  additional 
research  is  required  in  this  domain  to  further  understand  the  predictors  of  LOS  for  stroke 
patients. 

Keywords: Length of Stay, Stroke, Machine Learning, Data Mining, Statistical Analysis. 

1. INTRODUCTION

H 

EALTHCARE sectors  show  increasing  costs  in  most  regions  around  the  world.  Healthcare
expenditure  constitutes  a  significant  share  of  the  gross  domestic  product  for  many 
countries. There are many challenges associated with growth in the healthcare sector, including 
increased pressure on the limited resources of hospitals. This issue has motivated researchers 
to  conduct  further  research  related  to  hospital  resource  optimization.  Since  hospitalization 
constitutes  a  significant  cost  of  patient  care,  many  researchers  have  been  investigating  the 
problem of patient Length of Stay (LOS) prediction. LOS is defined as the duration of a patient 
hospitalization,  and  it  is  determined  as  the  difference  between  the  timestamp  of  a  patient 
hospital discharge and the timestamp of their hospital admission [1], [2]. LOS prediction is an 
important topic for many reasons, such as: 

• Knowledge of LOS allows hospitals to manage their bed and room capacities so that

•

they can know how long a patient is expected to occupy hospital space.
Information about LOS allows hospitals to determine the number of staff that must be
scheduled over the day/night shifts to properly accommodate the patients.

• Patients and their families can estimate the cost of a stay in paid hospitalizations.

By  investigating  the  existing  literature,  we  found  that  LOS  prediction  papers  used  machine 
learning/statistical approaches and can be divided into the type of disease under consideration. 
Some  authors  studied  LOS  prediction  in  general  (i.e.  without  specifying  a  specific  disease), 
while other researchers focused on LOS prediction pertinent to a specific disease (e.g., stroke, 

1 

diabetes). Fig. 1 depicts this categorization and includes example references to research articles. 

Fig. 1. Classification of LOS prediction research articles. 

In this survey, we review papers that predict the patients' LOS in general and then we focus 
on LOS prediction for stroke patients. We focused on stroke patients because they face many 
challenges with definite need for hospitalization, and also because strokes have an enormous 
cost on healthcare systems around the world. Using popular research search engines (e.g., IEEE 
Xplore, Springer, Science Direct, etc.), we searched phrases such as "length of stay", "hospital 
length of stay", "prediction", "machine learning", "stroke", "ischemic stroke", "data mining", 
and "statistical analysis" in order to find existing work on this topic (up to mid 2020). 

the 

third 

Stroke  is  a  disease  that  affects  the  arteries  leading  to  and  within  the  brain.  It  can  be  a 
significant  financial  and  health  burden  for  patients,  medical  staff,  and  healthcare  systems. 
Stroke is associated with prolonged LOS in hospitals and rehabilitation facilities [1] and is a 
leading cause of death and disability worldwide. According to Statistics Canada, in 2018, stroke 
was 
in  Canada  after  cancer  and  heart  disease 
(https://www.statcan.gc.ca).  Stroke,  also  known  as  cerebrovascular  accident  (or  CVA),  is  a 
sudden and devastating illness that is characterized by the rapid loss of the functions of the brain 
due to a disruption of blood flow to the brain (see Fig. 2). This disruption is caused by: lack of 
blood flow (ischemic strokes), which account for more than 80% of all strokes;  blockage of 
blood flow; or hemorrhage [3]. 

largest  cause  of  death 

Fig. 2. Illustration of stroke (Source: Mayo Clinic (mayoclinic.org)). 

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Below we present our literature review on 

2 

 

 
 

 

LOS prediction for general patients. Next we consider stroke patients. Finally, the paper ends 
with a discussion and conclusions section. 

2. LOS PREDICTION FOR GENERAL PATIENTS 

Kabir et al. [4] proposed a non-linear feature selection method using artificial neural networks 
(ANNs) to determine the most essential features for LOS prediction. The study evaluates the 
performance  of  (ANNs),  support  vector  machines  (SVM),  and  logistic  regression  (LR)  on 
selected subsets of features to predict the LOS class and identify the best subset of features. The 
study used a dataset from the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database. The 
dataset, based on data from 2015, included 273 features of more than 880,000 surgical patients 
admitted to hospital for various surgical procedures to address different diseases and medical 
conditions. The authors reduced the features from 273 to 40 based on consultation with domain 
experts  (anesthesiologists).  After  preprocessing  the  dataset,  715,143  patient  records  were 
selected for further analysis. The patients were categorized using their medical group into the 
following nine surgical categories: (1) general surgery, (2) vascular, (3) urology, (4) plastics, 
(5) otolaryngology, (6) orthopedics, (7) gynecology, (8) neurosurgery, and (9) other surgical 
conditions  (including  thoracic,  cardiac  surgery,  and  interventional  radiology  patients).  An 
additional category that includes all patients was added as group (10) for comparison purposes. 
The authors presented the normalized importance score of features for each patient category. In 
general, features 16, 20, and 21 showed the most significant contribution to the prediction of 
LOS. Feature 16 indicates the period from admission to surgery, feature 20 denotes whether the 
patient  is  an  outpatient  or  inpatient,  and  feature  21  represents  the  estimated  probability  of 
morbidity computed by the hospital using LR. These features had a strong correlation with LOS 
which  validates  the  performance  of  the  non-linear  approach  of  this  study  in  obtaining 
considerable  features.  Another  important  factor  presented  in  this  research  is  the  specific 
correlation  of  features  with  their  categories.  For  example,  feature  38,  which  represents  the 
situation of a patient's wound, was important in predicting the LOS for otolaryngology patients, 
while it had less importance in LOS predicting for other patient categories. By comparing the 
importance of features computed for all patients (group 10) with other categories, the authors 
showed  that  grouping  patients  based  on  their  disease  can  improve  the  accuracy  of  LOS 
predictive models. The final results revealed that ANNs, as non-linear classifiers, beat SVMs 
and LR in the achieved accuracy for LOS prediction. This proves that the relationship between 
LOS and its predictors is highly non-linear. The ANNs model improves accuracy and eliminates 
the number of required features. 

Azari  et  al.  [5]  used  a  multi-tiered  data  mining  approach  for  predicting  hospital  LOS  to 
decrease  the  uncertainty  related  with  the  LOS  for  inpatients.  Their  prediction  approach  was 
based  on  clustering  (i.e.,  k-means  clustering)  to  create  the  training  sets  that  train  various 
classification  algorithms.  The  number  of  clusters  was  determined  based  on  the  disease 
conditions or by using the Charlson index which provides the general categories of the diseases. 
Fig. 3 describes the approach used in  this study. Several  classifiers were  used to  predict the 
LOS such as: K-nearest neighbors, LR, naive Bayes, SVMs, Bayesian networks (Bnets), J48 
decision  tree,  classification  rules  (JRip),  bagging,  random  forest,  and  boosting.  The  paper 
considered various performance metrics such as accuracy, Kappa statistic, precision, recall, and 
area under the curve (AUC). In order to rank the classifiers, researchers used the Friedman test 
to determine the classifier with the best outcome for a certain level of clustering. The dataset 

3 
 

 

 
 

 

used the Heritage Health prize data. The dataset contains 1,048,576 records of hospital claims 
within  a  3-year  period.  The  results  showed  that  using  clustering  as  a  precursor  to  form  the 
training set provides better results compared to non-clustering based training sets. The results 
also showed that Bnets, SVMs, JRip, Bagging, and J48 had better overall performance than the 
other classifiers. The outcomes of the paper were validated by a domain expert from Emergency 
Medicine. 

 

Fig. 3. LOS prediction approach of Azari et al. [5]. 

 

 

 
Nouaouri et al. [6] proposed the application of data mining techniques to predict the LOS for 
patients without considering a specific disease. They introduced the Evidential LOS prediction 
Algorithm (ELOSA) that allows the prediction of the LOS of a new patient. Their approach 
handles  the  imprecision,  uncertainty,  and  missing  data  within  the  dataset  of  patients.  The 
ELOSA algorithm is based on the precise support and association rule confidence measures [6]. 
The LOS experiments were conducted on a real hospital dataset that contains the data for 270 
patients. To predict the inpatient LOS, the authors considered age, sex, physiological conditions 
(emergency degree), and operation length. The emergency degree column in the dataset was a 
categorical  attribute  that  contained  values  from  the  following  set  {A,  R,  D}.  A  indicates  an 
absolute  emergency,  R  is  for  relative  emergency,  and  D  represents  delayed  emergency.  The 
length of stay was classified as Short (S), approximately 3 days, Medium (M), approximately 
10  days,  and  Long  (L),  approximately  20  days,  with  a  small  overlap  between  the  ranges  as 
shown  in  Fig.  4.  They  compared  their  results  with  other  algorithms  in  similar  studies  and 
concluded that their approach showed better results. 

Rathor  et  al.  [7]  used  a  clustering  algorithm  (i.e.,  Density  Based  Spatial  Clustering  of 
Applications with Noise (DB- SCAN)) and K-Apriori, which is a combination of Apriori and 
K-means algorithms. The algorithms were applied to a dataset of 9,052 patients (the source of 
the dataset was not disclosed). The execution time of the algorithms were compared, showing 
DBSCAN to be faster than the K-Apriori; although, DBSCAN took exponentially longer as the 
number of inputs increased. The prediction was based on the current symptoms and medical 
history  of  the  patients,  which  was  provided  by  the  patient  at  the  time  of  admission.  For 
prediction of LOS, the medical data underwent a pre-processing phase, which had three steps:  

 
 

4 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 4. LOS classes in terms of days [6]. 

 

 
data  cleaning,  data  integration  and  transformation,  and  data  reduction.  Then,  using  the 
processed  data,  symptoms  for  a  particular  disease  were  grouped  together  and  used  for  LOS 
prediction.  The  study  determined  the  times  of  execution  of  K-apriori  and  DBSCAN 
independently and subsequently compared them. Both algorithms were treated with the same 
number of inputs and with the same values. The authors concluded that the execution time of 
DBSCAN was comparatively much shorter than K-Apriori, but as the number of inputs increase 
to high values, the execution time of DBSCAN increased exponentially whereas there was no 
change in K-Apriori. 

 

3. LOS PREDICTION FOR STROKE PATIENTS 

In stroke, the brain is prevented from getting oxygen and nutrients from the blood. Without 
oxygen and nutrients, brain cells begin to die within minutes. Sudden bleeding in the brain can 
also cause a stroke if it damages brain cells. A stroke is a medical emergency that can cause 
lasting brain damage, long-term disability, or even death. Signs of a stroke can range from mild 
weakness to paralysis or numbness on one side of the face or body. Other signs include a sudden 
and severe headache, sudden weakness, trouble seeing, and trouble speaking or understanding 
speech (https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/stroke). 

Al Taleb et al. [3] introduced a machine learning method for early prediction of LOS of stroke 
patients. They tested their approach at the Stroke Unit of King Fahad Bin Abdul- Aziz Hospital 
in Saudi Arabia. The study was based on 866 stroke patients, whose data was retrieved from 
the Neurology Department database. For data cleaning, each set of patient data was manually 
examined for invalid or erroneous inputs. Records with missing values in more than 50% of the 
attributes  were  deleted.  For  the  records  with  missing  values  in  less  than  50%  of  attributes, 
missing values were replaced with the average value of the respective attributes for numeric 
attributes,  and  with  the  mode  value  for  the  categorical  attributes.  The  approach  involved  a 
feature  selection  step  based  on  Information  Gain  (IG)  followed  by  a  prediction  model 
development step using different machine learning algorithms as explained below. 

 
The  original  dataset  contained  105  attributes,  out  of  which  54  attributes  were  manually 
eliminated due to being irrelevant or redundant, such as time of arrival, date of MRI, and cause 
of death. The remaining 51 attributes were ranked based on their IG with respect to LOS, and 
then an iterative process of elimination was applied where the researchers began processing all 

5 
 

 

 
 

 

of the features. Then features were eliminated one at a time, starting with the least ranked one, 
and  the  IG  was  recalculated.  The  repetitive  process  stopped  when  there  was  no  further 
improvement  in  IG.  Finally,  16  remaining  attributes  (including  LOS)  were  selected  for  the 
prediction steps. The selected attributes and their IG values are listed in Fig. 5. 

 
 

 

 

Fig. 5. Selected attributes and their IG values with respect to the class attribute (LOS) [3].  

 

Prediction results were compared to identify the algorithm with the best performance. Several 
experiments were performed in various settings. The authors found that the most accurate model 
in their study was the Bnet model with accuracy of 81.28%. 

In another study, Neto et al. [8] proposed a neural network LOS prediction method based on 
the  information  available  on  the  stroke  neurological  events,  the  patient's  health  status,  and 
surgery details. The neural network was trained to test with three attribute subsets of different 
sizes. The first subset contained 33 attributes, the second 14, and the third subset consisted of 
only  7  attributes.  By  testing  the  three  subsets,  it  was  possible  to  define  an  optimal  neural 
network  configuration  where  the  lowest  error  values  were  registered  as  Root  Mean  Squared 
Error, 5.9451, and Mean Absolute Error, 4.6354. They concluded that the third use case (the 
one with fewer variables) obtained better results than the other attribute sets. 

Zhang et al. [1] aimed to develop a risk prediction model of prolonged LOS in stroke patients 
for  50  inpatient  rehabilitation  centers  in  20  provinces  across  mainland  China,  based  on  the 
International  Classification  of  Functioning,  Disability,  and  Health  Generic  Set  case  mix  on 
admission.  The  study  was  conducted  on  383  stroke  patients.  The  independent  predictors  of 
prolonged  LOS  were  identified  using  Multivariate  Logistic  Regression  (MLR)  analysis.  A 
prediction model was established and then evaluated by receiver operating characteristic curve 
analysis, and the Hosmer-Lemeshow test. The results showed that the type of medical insurance 
and the performance of daily activities were associated with prolonged LOS. Age and mobility 
level demonstrated no significant predictive value. The prediction model revealed acceptable 
discrimination shown by an AUC of 0.699. The researchers concluded that the scores for the 
type  of  medical  insurance  and  the  performance  of  daily  activities  on  admission  were 

6 
 

 

 
 

 

independent predictors of prolonged LOS for stroke patients. Their study proved that prediction 
models allow stakeholders to quantitatively estimate the risk of prolonged LOS upon admission, 
and to facilitate financial planning. They can also determine any required treatment regimens 
during hospitalization, the need for referral after discharge, and reimbursement of costs. 

Minaeian et al. [9] sought to determine whether a longer emergency LOS was associated with 
a  poor  90-day  outcome  following  an  ischemic  stroke.  Their  method  was  based  on  a 
retrospective analysis of a single-center cohort of consecutive ischemic stroke patients. There 
were  325  patients  in  the  study.  They  constructed  multivariable  linear  and  LR  models  to 
determine  factors  independently  associated  with  emergency  LOS  as  well  as  a  poor  90-day 
outcome. The results revealed that the median LOS in the cohort was 5.8 hours of time spent in 
emergency.  For  patients  admitted  to  the  inpatient  stroke  ward  (160  patients)  versus 
neurointensive care unit (NICU) (165 patients), the median LOS was 8.2 hours versus 3.7 hours, 
respectively. On multivariable linear regression, NICU admission, endovascular stroke therapy, 
and  thrombolysis  were  inversely  associated  with  the  LOS.  Evening  shift  presentation  was 
associated  with  a  longer  LOS.  On  MLR,  a  greater  admission  stroke  severity,  worse  pre-
admission modified Rankin scale, hemorrhagic conversion, and a shorter LOS were associated 
with  a  poor  90-day  outcome.  Early  initiation  of  statin  therapy,  endovascular  stroke  therapy, 
NICU admission, and evening shift presentation were associated with a good 90-day outcome. 
The authors stressed in their conclusion that in contrast to prior studies, a shorter emergency 
LOS was  associated with  a worse  90-day functional  outcome, possibly  reflecting prioritized 
admission of more severely affected stroke patients who were at high risk for a poor functional 
outcome. 

Chang et al. [10] aimed to determine the clinical and demographic predictors of LOS of acute 
care  hospital  stay  for  patients  with  first-ever  ischemic  stroke.  In  the  study,  a  group  of  330 
patients  who  had  their  first-ever  ischemic  stroke  and  were  admitted  to  a  medical  center  in 
southern Taiwan were followed prospectively. The researchers evaluated only the factors that 
could be known at the time of admission. Univariate analysis and multiple regression analysis 
were used to identify the LOS main predictors. 

In the reported results, the median LOS was 7 days, average LOS was 11 days, and the LOS 
range was 1 to 122 days. Among the prespecified demographic and clinical characteristics, the 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score at admission, the quadratic term of 
the initial NIHSS score, the modified Barthel Index score at admission, small-vessel occlusion 
stroke,  smoking,  and  sex  were  the  main  predictors  for  LOS.  In  particular,  for  each  1-point 
increase in the score of NIHSS, LOS increased by approximately 1 day for patients with mild 
or  moderate  neurological  impairments  (score  0  to  15  points),  while  LOS  decreased 
approximately 1 day for patients with severe neurological impairments (score 15 points). The 
authors concluded that the severity of acute stroke, as scored by the total score on NIHSS, was 
an important factor influencing LOS after acute stroke hospitalization.  

Appelros  et  al.  [11]  examined  the  factors  that  influence  acute  and  total  LOS  for  stroke 
patients.  The  basis  of  their  investigation  was  a  population-based  cohort  of  first-ever  stroke 
patients  (388  patients).  Patient  data  included  age,  sex,  risk  factors,  social  factors,  dementia, 
stroke type, and stroke severity, measured using the NIHSS. The results showed a mean acute 
LOS of 12 days and mean total LOS of 29 days. Independent predictors of acute LOS were 
stroke severity,  lacunar stroke, pre-stroke dementia, and smoking.  Independent  predictors of 
total LOS were stroke severity and pre-stroke activities of daily living dependency. The NIHSS 

7 
 

 

 
 

 

elements  that  best  correlated  with  LOS  included  paresis,  unilateral  neglect,  and  level  of 
consciousness. The conclusion was that stroke severity is a strong and reliable predictor of LOS. 
The results can be used as a baseline for evaluating cost-effectiveness of stroke care changes, 
such as assessment of new drugs and organizational modifications. 

The study conducted by Okere et al. [12] was designed to evaluate predictors of hospital LOS 
and re-admissions among non-surgical ischemic stroke patients. The patients in this study were 
adult  patients  (≥  18  years)  with  a  diagnosis  of  non-surgical  ischemic  stroke,  who  were 
hospitalized between November 2007 and March 2013. The results of the statistical analyses 
(multivariate and bivariate analyses), revealed that insurance type was a significant predictor of 
LOS, with Medicare patients having a longer LOS compared to patients with private insurance. 
Severity of illness was also a predictor of LOS, whereby patients prescribed statins and patients 
aged less than 80 years old had a lower 30-day hospital re-admission rate compared to patients 
who were not prescribed statins and who were older than 80 years of age, respectively. 

Choi et al. [13] considered LOS prediction for acute stroke patients and extracted their dataset 
from 2013 and 2014 discharge injured patient data. The data was classified as 60% for training 
and  40%  for  evaluation.  In  their  model,  they  used  the  multiple  regression  analysis  method 
combined with machine learning techniques (such as decision tree and neural network) to create 
an  ensemble  technique  that  integrates  all  methods.  They  evaluated  their  model  using  root 
absolute  error  index.  Considering  the  used  methods,  the  error  index  was  23.7  for  multiple 
regression, 23.7 for decision tree, 22.7 for neural network, and 22.7 for the ensemble technique. 
They concluded that the neural network technique was found to be superior (even reaching the 
level of ensemble methods). 

In  the  study  carried  out  by  Svendsen  et  al.  [14],  the  author's  objective  was  to  determine 
whether healthcare quality was associated with LOS among stroke patients. They performed a 
population-based  study  that  included  2,636  stroke  patients  between  2003  and  2005  from  a 
stroke unit in Denmark. In this study, quality of care was measured as fulfillment of twelve (12) 
criteria: "early admission to a stroke unit, early antiplatelet therapy, early anticoagulant therapy, 
early  computed  tomography/magnetic  resonance  imaging  scan,  early  water  swallowing  test, 
early  mobilization,  early  intermittent  catheterization,  early  deep  venous  thromboembolism 
prophylaxis, early assessment by a Physiotherapist and an Occupational Therapist, and early 
assessment of nutritional and constipation risk" [14]. The authors' analyzed the patients' data 
using linear regression clustered at the stroke units by multilevel modeling. The results showed 
that  the  median  length  of  stay  was  13  days.  Fulfilling  each  quality  of  care  criterion  was 
associated with shorter LOS. The authors found that "the association between meeting more 
quality of care criteria and LOS followed a dose-response effect, that is, patients who fulfilled 
between 75% and 100% of the quality of care criteria were hospitalized only one-half as long 
as patients who fulfilled between 0% and 24% of the criteria". The study concluded that the 
care in the early phase of stroke is very important as a high initial quality of care was associated 
with shorter length of stay among stroke patients. 

Garza-Ulloa  [15]  used  neural  network  algorithms  to  predict  rehabilitation  LOS  for  stroke 
patients along with other stroke metrics (i.e., the need for surgery and rehabilitation need). The 
study  objective  was  to  find  an  optimal  neural  network  configuration  using  three  different 
available software: one manual (with no automatic stepwise functions and limited diagnostic 
capability),  another  semi-automatic  (allows  step-  wise  function  with  good  diagnostics),  and 
neuro-intelligence (uses genetic algorithm to find the best neural network (NN) configuration). 

8 
 

 

 
 

 

Based on the 14 stroke input variables and the 3 output target stroke values, the paper suggested 
that  the  forecasting  of:  surgery,  rehab  and  days  of  rehabilitation  were  possible  using  neural 
network  tools.  Fig.  6  (from  [15])  outlines  the  14-group  variables  for  the  proposed  neural 
network . 

 

 
Fig. 6. 14-Group variables for the proposed NN [15]. 

 

The study of Ng et al. [16] aimed to investigate LOS characteristics and identify the predictors 
of post-stroke acute, rehabilitation and total LOS. The study divided the stroke patients (1,277 
patients)  into  two  subgroups  of  short  LOS  and  long  LOS,  and  compared  the  two  subgroups 
regarding complication rates and functional outcomes. The authors considered stroke patients 
within a 5-year period from  2004 to  2009 in  a dedicated  rehabilitation unit within a tertiary 
academic  acute  hospital  in  Singapore.  The  primary  outcome  measure  considered  in  the 
rehabilitation phase was the functional independence measure (FIM). Short acute LOS patients 
were defined as patients who stayed less than 7 days. Most patients in the study were ischemic 
stroke patients (1,019 patients (80%)), while the remaining patients were haemorrhagic stroke 
patients (20%). The results of the study showed that the average acute and rehabilitation LOS 
were  9-7  days  and  18-10  days,  respectively.  "Haemorrhagic  strokes  and  anterior  circulation 
infarcts  had  significantly  longer  acute,  rehabilitation  and  total  LOS  compared  to  posterior 
circulation and lacunar infarcts" [16]. Patients that were admitted after 2007 had significantly 
shorter  acute,  rehabilitation  and  total  LOS.  The  authors  found  poor  correlation  between  the 
acute  and  rehabilitation  LOS  (r  =  0.12).  In  multivariate  analysis,  considering  rehabilitation 
LOS,  admission  FIM  scores  were  significantly  associated  with  LOS,  while,  in  acute  LOS, 
stroke type was strongly associated with LOS. "Patients in the short acute LOS group had fewer 
medical complications and similar FIM efficacies compared to the longer acute LOS group." 
[16]. The authors concluded that it is very important to transfer appropriate patients as early as 
possible to rehabilitation units as this ensures that the development of clinical complications is 
minimized, while rehabilitation efficacy is maintained. 

Bindawas  et  al.  [17]  aimed  to  investigate  the  association  between  LOS  and  functional 
outcomes among patients with stroke discharged from a rehabilitation facility in Saudi Arabia. 
There were 409 adult patients in the study (age 18) admitted between 2008 and 2014, with no 
deaths during the study period. Patients were divided into 4 different groups based on the days 

9 
 

 

 
 

 

of rehabilitation: ≤ 30 days (n=114), 31 -- 60 days (n=199), 61 -- 90 days (n=72), and > 90 days 
(n=24). Multivariate regression analyses were used to evaluate functional outcomes using the 
FIM. The results of the study showed that higher FIM scores were significantly associated with 
a LOS ≤ 30 days and 31 -- 60 days, compared to > 90 days. The authors concluded that "a short 
or intermediate LOS is not necessarily associated with worse outcomes, assuming adequate care 
is provided." [17]. 

Arboix  et  al.  [18] considered the identification of clinical  predictors of prolonged hospital 
stay after acute stroke. They considered a long study period of 17 years for patients in Spain 
who have had their first-ever ischemic stroke and primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Prolonged 
LOS stay was defined as LOS longer than 12 days after admission. The attributes considered 
included demographic data, cardiovascular risk factors, neuroimaging findings, clinical factors, 
and  outcome.  LR  analysis  was  used  to  evaluate  the  independent  influence  of  statistically 
significant variables in the duration of hospitalization. The results of 3,112 acute stroke patients 
showed that prolonged hospital stay was recorded in 1,536 (49.4%) cases. Furthermore, males, 
limb  weakness,  vascular  complications,  urinary  complications,  and  infectious  complications 
were  independently  associated  with  longer  LOS,  whereas  being  symptom  free  at  hospital 
discharge and lacunar infarction were inversely associated with prolonged LOS. The authors 
concluded  that  "in-hospital  medical  complications  (vascular,  urinary,  and  infectious)  are 
relevant factors influencing duration of hospitalization after acute stroke. Therefore, prevention 
of potentially modifiable risk factors for medical complications is an important aspect of the 
early management of patients who experienced stroke" [18]. 

The objective of the study conducted by Koton et al. [19] was to derive a simple score for the 
assessment of the risk of prolonged length of stay for acute stroke patients. Prolonged LOS was 
defined  as  LOS  ≥  7  days.  The  results  showed  that  the  severity  of  stroke  was  the  strongest 
multivariable predictor of prolonged LOS. The study concluded that a simple prolonged LOS 
score, based on available baseline information (stroke severity), may be useful for developing 
policies aimed at better use of resources and optimal discharge planning of acute stroke patients 
[19]. 

Hung  et  al.  [20]  aimed  to  consider  the  factors  that  influence  LOS  for  stroke  patients  in 
Taiwan. The researchers explored how intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) affects LOS in an acute 
care hospital setting. The study considered adult patients with ischemic stroke who presented 
within 48 hours of stroke onset. The relationship between IVT and prolonged length of stay 
(LOS ≥ 7 days) was studied by both classification and regression tree, as well as MLR analyses. 
Fig. 7 illustrates the risk stratification for prolonged LOS by means of the classification and 
regression tree analysis. Among the study population of 3,054 patients, 1,110 presented within 
4.5 hours. The median LOS was 7 days (ranging from 4 to 11 days), and 1,619 patients had 
prolonged  LOS.  MLR  revealed  that  IVT  was  an  independent  factor  that  reduced  the  risk  of 
prolonged LOS, whereas age, NIHSS score, diabetes mellitus, and leukocytosis at admission 
predicted prolonged LOS. Decision tree analysis identified four variables (NIHSS score, IVT, 
leukocytosis  at  admission,  and  age)  as  important  factors  and  they  were  used  to  partition the 
patients into six subgroups (see Fig. 7). The patient subgroup that had an NIHSS score of 5 to 
7  and  received  IVT  had  the  lowest  probability  (19%)  of  prolonged  LOS  [20].  The  authors 
concluded  that  IVT  minimized  the  risk  of  prolonged  length  of  stay  in  patients  with  acute 
ischemic stroke. They recommended that measures to increase the rate of IVT be encouraged. 

 

10 

 

 

 
 

 

Fig. 7. Risk stratification for prolonged LOS by means of the classification 

and regression tree analysis [20]. 

 

 4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

The  topic  of  hospital  LOS  is  an  important  topic  for  hospital  resource  utilization  and 
optimization [21][22]. Although many researchers have conducted research on LOS prediction, 
more research is needed to further enrich this domain of study. We noticed from our literature 
review that researchers occasionally reached contradicting conclusions about LOS for stroke 
patients. For example, some researchers (e.g., [1]) found that the age of the patient was not a 
significant predictor of prolonged LOS, whereas, others (e.g., [20]) concluded that a patient's 
age was an important predictor for LOS for stroke patients. This shows how LOS prediction is 
a complex phenomenon that requires more studies and careful investigation. On the other hand, 
most researchers (implicitly or explicitly) agreed that stroke severity (e.g., NIHSS) is a major 
predictor of LOS in stroke patients. 

Another  observation  from  our  literature  review  is  that  not  all  researchers  teamed  up  with 
domain experts while conducting machine learning studies on LOS prediction. We view this as 
a limitation in such studies because LOS prediction is a topic that is highly related to the medical 
field as well as to patients' medical data and characteristics. This implies that in future research, 
domain  experts  should  be  consulted  before  finalizing  and  publishing  such  LOS  prediction 
studies. Domain experts enrich the studies and make them more realistic. 

Another point is that some researchers did not specifically mention the attributes that were 
effective in LOS prediction at the end of their studies. However, this particular information is 
highly  important  for  the  readers  of  such  research  articles  so  that  new  research  can  build  on 
previous  studies.  We  also  recommend  more  future  cooperation  between  machine  learning 
researchers in this field because of its importance in hospital resource utilization, decreasing 
healthcare costs, and achieving healthier people and an overall healthier society.  

11 

 

 

 

REFERENCES 

 
 

 

[1]  X. Zhang, H. Qiu, S. Liu, J. Li, and M. Zhou, "Prediction of prolonged length of stay for stroke 

patients  on  admission  for  inpatient  rehabilitation based  on  the  international  classification  of 

functioning, disability, and health (ICF) generic set: A study from 50 centers in china,"  Medical 

Science Monitor: International Medical Journal of Experimental and Clinical  Research,  vol.  26, 

pp. e918 811 -- 1,  2020. 

[2] 

I.  E.  Livieris,  I.  F.  Dimopoulos,  T.  Kotsilieris,  and  P.  Pintelas,  "Predicting length  of  stay  in 

hospitalized patients using ssl algorithms," in Proceed- ings of the 8th International Conference on 

Software Development and Technologies for Enhancing Accessibility and Fighting Info-exclusion, 

2018, pp. 16 -- 22. 

[3]  A. R. Al Taleb, M. Hoque, A. Hasanat, and M. B. Khan, "Application of data mining techniques 

to  predict  length  of  stay  of  stroke  patients," in  2017  International  Conference  on  Informatics, 

Health & Technology (ICIHT).  IEEE, 2017, pp. 1 -- 5. 

[4] 

S. Kabir and L. Farrokhvar, "Non-linear feature selection for prediction of hospital length of stay," 

in 2019 18th IEEE International Conference On Machine Learning And Applications (ICMLA). 

IEEE, 2019, pp. 945 -- 950. 

[5]  A.  Azari,  V.  P.  Janeja,  and  A.  Mohseni, "Predicting hospital  length  of  stay (PHLOS):  A  multi-

tiered  data  mining  approach,"  in  2012  IEEE  12th  International  Conference  on  Data  Mining 

Workshops. IEEE, 2012, pp. 17 -- 24. 

[6] 

I. Nouaouri, A. Samet, and H. Allaoui, "Evidential data mining for length of stay (LOS) prediction 

problem,"  in  2015  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Automation  Science  and  Engineering 

(CASE). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1415 -- 1420. 

[7] 

   R.  Rathor  and  P.  Agarkar,  "Losh  prediction  using  data  mining,"  Inter-  national  Journal  of 

Computer Applications, vol. 119, no. 2, 2015. 

[8] 

   C. Neto, M. Brito, H. Peixoto, V. Lopes, A. Abelha, and J. Machado, "Prediction of length of 

stay  for  stroke  patients  using  artificial  neural  networks,"  in  World  Conference  on  Information 

Systems and Technolo- gies.  Springer, 2020, pp. 212 -- 221. 

[9] 

   A. Minaeian, A.  Patel, B. Essa,  R. P. Goddeau  Jr, M. Moonis, and N. Henninger, "Emergency 

department  length  of  stay  and  outcome  after  ischemic  stroke,"  Journal  of  Stroke  and 

Cerebrovascular Diseases, vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 2167 -- 2173, 2017. 

[10]  K.-C.  Chang,  M.-C.  Tseng,  H.-H.  Weng,  Y.-H.  Lin,  C.-W.  Liou,  and  T.-Y.  Tan,  "Prediction  of 

length of stay of first-ever ischemic stroke," Stroke, vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 2670 -- 2674, 2002. 

12 

 

 

 
 

 

[11] 

P. Appelros, "Prediction of length of stay for stroke patients," Acta Neurologica Scandinavica, vol. 

116, no. 1, pp. 15 -- 19, 2007. 

[12]  A. N. Okere, C. M. Renier, and  A.  Frye,  "Predictors  of  hospital length of stay and readmissions 

in ischemic stroke patients and the impact of inpatient medication management," Journal of Stroke 

and Cerebrovascular Diseases, vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 1939 -- 1951, 2016. 

[13] 

B.  K.  Choi,  S.  W.  Ham,  C.  H.  Kim,  J.  S.  Seo,  M.  H.  Park,  and  S. H.  Kang,  "Development  of 

predictive  model  for  length  of  stay  (los) in  acute stroke  patients  using artificial  intelligence," 

Journal of Digital Convergence, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 231 -- 242, 2018. 

[14]  M.  L.  Svendsen,  L.  H.  Ehlers,  G.  Andersen,  and  S.  P.  Johnsen,  "Quality  of  care  and  length  of 

hospital stay among patients with stroke," Medical care, pp. 575 -- 582, 2009. 

[15] 

J.  Garza-Ulloa,  "Artificial  intelligence  analysis  using  neural  network  to  predict  three  stroke 

parameters: Surgery needed, treatment, and length of stay for rehabilitation." Unpublished. 

[16]  Y.  S.  Ng,  K.  H.  Tan,  C.  Chen,  G.  C.  Senolos,  E.  Chew,  and  G.  C.  Koh,  "Predictors  of  acute, 

rehabilitation and total length of stay in acute stroke: a prospective cohort study," Ann Acad Med 

Singapore, vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 394 -- 403, 2016. 

[17] 

S. M. Bindawas, V. Vennu, H. Mawajdeh, H. M. Alhaidary, and E. Mof- tah, "Length of stay and 

functional outcomes among patients with stroke discharged from an inpatient rehabilitation facility 

in  saudi  arabia,"  Medical  science  monitor:  international  medical  journal  of  experimental  and 

clinical research, vol. 24, p. 207, 2018. 

[18]  A. Arboix, J. Massons, L. Garc´ıa-Eroles, C. Targa, M. Oliveres, and E. Comes, "Clinical predictors 

of prolonged hospital stay after acute stroke: relevance of medical complications," 2012. 

[19] 

S. Koton, N. Bornstein, R. Tsabari, D. Tanne et al., "Derivation and validation of the prolonged 

length of stay score in acute stroke patients," Neurology, vol. 74, no. 19, pp. 1511 -- 1516, 2010. 

[20] 

L.-C. Hung, Y.-H. Hu, and S.-F. Sung, "Exploring the impact of intravenous thrombolysis on length 

of stay for acute ischemic stroke: a retrospective cohort study," BMC health services research, vol. 

15, no. 1, p. 404, 2015. 

[21]  A. Alahmar, E. Mohammed, and R. Benlamri. "Application of data mining techniques to predict 

the length of stay of hospitalized patients with diabetes." In 2018 4th International Conference on 

Big Data Innovations and Applications (Innovate-Data), pp. 38-43. IEEE, 2018. 

[22]  A.  Alahmar  and  R.  Benlamri,  Optimizing  Hospital  Resources  using  Big  Data  Analytics  with 

Standardized  e-Clinical  Pathways.  In  2020  IEEE  Intl  Conf  on  Cloud  and  Big  Data  Computing, 

(CBDCom), pp. 650-657. IEEE, August 2020. 

 

 

13 

 

