
TRANSLOG: A Unified Transformer-based Framework for

Log Anomaly Detection

Hongcheng Guo1∗ , Xingyu Lin4(cid:63) , Jian Yang1 , Yi Zhuang2 , Jiaqi Bai1 , Bo Zhang3 , Tieqiao

Zheng3 , Zhoujun Li1†

1State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
2Bio-robot and human-computer interaction laboratory, Waseda University

3Cloudwise Research 4University of Southern California

{hongchengguo, jiaya, jiaqi, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn, linxingy@usc.edu,

syouyi2020@asagi.waseda.jp {steven.zheng,bowen.zhang}@cloudwise.com

Abstract

Log anomaly detection is a key component
in
the field of artificial intelligence for IT operations
(AIOps). Considering log data of variant domains,
retraining the whole network for unknown domains
is inefficient in real industrial scenarios especially
for low-resource domains. However, previous deep
models merely focused on extracting the semantics
of log sequence in the same domain, leading to poor
generalization on multi-domain logs. Therefore,
we propose a unified Transformer-based frame-
work for Log anomaly detection (TRANSLOG),
which is comprised of the pretraining and adapter-
based tuning stage. Our model is first pretrained
on the source domain to obtain shared semantic
knowledge of log data. Then, we transfer the pre-
trained model to the target domain via the adapter-
based tuning. The proposed method is evaluated on
three public datasets including one source domain
and two target domains. The experimental results
demonstrate that our simple yet efficient approach,
with fewer trainable parameters and lower training
costs in target domain, achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on three benchmarks1.

1 Introduction
With the rapid development of large-scale IT systems, nu-
merous companies have an increasing demand for high-
quality cloud services. Anomaly detection [Grubbs, 1969;
Niu et al., 2011; Breier and Branisov´a, 2015] is a critical sub-
stage to monitoring data especially for logs, which describe
detailed system events at runtime and the intention of users
of the the large-scale services [Zhang et al., 2015]. The field
of artificial intelligence for IT operations (AIOps) [Dang et
al., 2019] intends to empower IT operations by integrating
advanced deep learning algorithms to meet these challenges,
which ensures the stability of company data and maintain
high efficiency simultaneously.

∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
1We will release the pretrained model and code.

Figure 1: The same anomaly from multiple domains. The top part
denotes the "Unusual End of Program" anomaly from three domains
including BGL, Thunderbird, and Red Storm while the bottom part
is the "Program Not Running" from four domains including BGL,
Thunderbird, Spirit, and Liberty..

Large-scale services are usually implemented by hundreds
of developers, it is error-prone to detect anomalous logs from
a local perspective. In this case, some automatic detection
methods based on machine learning are proposed [Xu et al.,
2010]. Due to the development of IT services, the volume
of log data has grown to the point where traditional ap-
proaches are infeasible. Therefore, research has turned to
deep learning methods [Zhang et al., 2016; Du et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2019; Meng et al., 2019]. As log messages are
half-structured and have its own semantics, which is simi-
lar to natural language corpus, language models like LSTM,
Transformer are leveraged to obtain semantics in logs. Re-
cently proposed methods even adopt fashion per-trained mod-
els like BERT [Devlin et al., 2018], GPT2 [Radford et al.,
2018] for better embedding representation.

We observe that logs from different sources actually have
the same anomalous categories. Despite being different in
morphology and syntax, logs of multiple domains are se-
mantically similar. For example, in Figure1, three sources
(BGL, Thunderbird, Red storm) all have the anomaly called
unusual end of program, thus we naturally think if the model

BGL:data storage interruptrts: kernel terminatedfor reason 1004rts: bad message header: [...]Thunderbird: kernel: mptscsih: ioc0: attempting task abort! (sc=00000101bddee480)Red Storm: DMT 310 Command Aborted: SCSI cmd:2A LUN 2 DMT 310 T:299 a: [...]Unusual End of ProgramBGL: rts panic! -stopping executionThunderbird: pbs mom: Bad file descriptor (9) in tm request, job [job] not runningSpirit: kernel: GM: LANaiis not running. Allowing port=0 open for debuggingLiberty: kernel: GM: LANaiis not running. Allowing port=0 open for debuggingProgram Not Runningcan identify the same anomalies in all domains with shared
semantic knowledge. However, existing approaches mostly
focus on single domain, when new components from a dif-
ferent/similar domain are introduced to the system, they lack
the ability to accommodate such unseen log messages. In ad-
dition, detecting anomalies in a large service system requires
copies of the models, which is costly. It's necessary to find
a transfer method that performs well on logs from different
domains, but without training an entire new model for every
new domain.

In this paper, we address these problems via a two-stage
solution called Translog. Translog is capable of preserving
the shared semantic knowledge between different domains.
More specifically, we first create a neural network model
based on the self-attention mechanism, which is pretrained
on the source domain to obtain common semantics of log se-
quences. Second, Translog utilizes a flexible plugin-in com-
ponent called adapter to transfer knowledge from source do-
main to target domain.

Generally, the main contributions of this work are listed
as follows: (i) We propose Translog, an end-to-end frame-
work using Transformer encoder architecture to automati-
cally detect log anomalies. (ii) With only a few additional
trainable parameters on target domain, Translog allows a high
degree of parameter-sharing while reducing time and calcu-
lation consumption. (iii) Our Translog performs well under
different amounts of training data, especially when the train-
ing data is low-resource. (iv) The proposed approach is eval-
uated against three public datasets: HDFS, BGL and Thun-
derbird. Translog reaches state-of-the-art performance on all
these three datasets.

2 Background
Log Parsing The purpose of log parsing is converting un-
structured log data into the structured event template by re-
moving parameters and keeping the keywords. After extract-
ing all the templates, we match each log message and the
corresponding template. Next, the log template sequence is
fed into anomaly detection models. The previous work [He
et al., 2017] adopts a fixed-depth tree structure to split the
log data and extracts structured templates. AEL [Jiang et al.,
2008] clusters log messages by comparing the frequency of
occurrence between constants and variables. Spell [Du and
Li, 2016] applies the longest common subsequence algorithm
to parse logs efficiently. IPLoM [Makanju et al., 2009] uti-
lizes an iterative partition strategy to divide log messages into
groups based on message length, token position, and mapping
relationship.
Adapter-based Tuning Adapter-based tuning [Houlsby et
al., 2019; Bapna and Firat, 2019] is proved to be a parameter-
efficient alternative in many NLP tasks. The structure of
adapters is light-weight, which is usually inserted between
transformer layers [Vaswani et al., 2017]. When we tune the
model on downstream tasks, only the parameter of adapters
are updated while the weights of the pretrained model are
frozen.
though utilizing much less trainable pa-
rameters compared to full fine-tuning [Devlin et al., 2018;
Stickland and Murray, 2019] , adapter-based tuning reaches

Thus,

Figure 2: Logs and Templates

comparable performance while permitting a high level of
parameter-sharing.
Log Anomaly Detection There are two main methods for
log anomaly detection, including supervised and unsuper-
vised methods. Supervised methods are often classification-
based method [Breier and Branisov´a, 2015; Huang et al.,
2020]. The earlier work applied the LSTM model to detect
failures. Furthermore, Neurallog [Le and Zhang, 2021a] uses
BERT to transform raw log messages directly into semantic
embeddings, avoiding the loss of important information due
to log parsing errors. However, obtaining system-specific la-
belled samples is costly and often impractical. The unsuper-
vised learning methods [Xu et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2016;
Du et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019] have been proposed. The
wide adoption of deep learning methods resulted in various
new solutions for log-based anomaly detection. DeepLog [Du
et al., 2017] also use LSTM to forecast the next log event
and then compare it with the current ground truth to detect
anomalies. However, the input of the unsupervised method is
a one-hot log vector representing the index of the log tem-
plate. Therefore, it cannot cope with newly emerging log
events.

Furthermore, LogRobust

[Zhang et al., 2019] and
LogAnomaly [Meng et al., 2019] adopt pre-trained word vec-
tors to learn the representation of logs, where they train an
attention-based Bi-LSTM model. CNNLog [Lu et al., 2018]
takes totally CNN(Convolutional Neural Network) architec-
ture to learn log event representation. Different from all the
above methods, we take the pre-trained model [Reimers and
Gurevych, 2019] for a better log event representation, which
is the core mind of self-training. And then we use the trans-
former encoder [Vaswani et al., 2017] to model the semantic
information between sentences.

3 TRANSLOG
In this section, we will introduce our semantic log anomaly
analysis model, named TRANSLOG. The architecture of the
TRANSLOG is illustrated in Fig.3. To notice that the part

𝐿1:TIMES8 crond(pam_unix)[2915]: session closed for user root𝐿2: TIMESdn228/dn228 crond(pam_unix)[2915]: session opened for user root by (uid=0)𝐿3: TIMES(root) CMD (run-parts /etc/cron.hourly)𝐿4: TIMESsession closed for user root𝐿5: TIMESsession opened for user root by (uid=0)𝐿1:session closed for user <*> 𝐿2:session opened for user <*> by <*>𝐿3:(root) CMD (<*> <*>)𝐿4:session closed for user <*> 𝐿5:session opened for user <*> by <*>Unstructured Logs𝑇1: session closed for user <*> 𝑇2: session opened for user <*> by <*>𝑇3: (root) CMD (<*> <*>)𝐿1𝐿2𝐿3𝐿4𝐿5Log templatesMappingDrain parsingStructured InputsFormattingof the log preprocessing is beyond our scope of the paper.
We will firstly introduce the design of log anomaly detection,
later we will describe more details of the model, including
embedding layer, TRANSLOG encoding layer and classifier
decoder layer.

3.1 Problem Definition
Log anomaly detection problem is defined as a dichotomy
problem. The model is supposed to determine whether the
input log is abnormal or normal. For the source domain,
assuming that through preprocessing, we achieve the vector
representations of Ksrc log sequences, which is denoted as
}T src
i = {V src
Ssrc = {Sk}Ksrc
t=1 denotes the
is the length of the i-th log se-
i-th log sequence, where T src
quence. For the target domain, Stgt = {stgt
k }Ktgt
k=1 denotes the
t }T tgt
j = {V tgt
representations of Ktgt log sequences. Stgt
t=1
denotes the i-th log sequence, where T tgt
is the length of
the i-th log sequence. Therefore, the training procedure is
defined as follows. We first pretrain the model on the source-
domain dataset as below:

k=1 . Then, Ssrc

t

i

i

i

i

fpretrain(yiSsrc

i

; Θ))

(1)

Then, the model is transferred to the target-domain as below:

fadapter(yjSsrc

j

; Θf , θa)

(2)
where fpretrain represents the pretraining stage while
fadapter represents the adapter-based tuning stage. Θ is the
parameter of the model in pretraining stage, Θf is the param-
eter transferred from the model in pretraining stage, which is
frozen in adapter-based tuning stage. θa is the parameter of
the adapter. y is the truth label.

Through Equation 1 and 2, TRANSLOG learns the semantic
representation of template sequences between domains. We
believe, this efficient parameter method, can not only transfer
cross-domain knowledge, but also provide great convenience
to industrial scenarios to a large extent.

3.2 Backbone Model
Feature Extractor The feature extractor converts session
sequences (template sequence) to vectors with the same di-
mension d. Here we use the pretrained sentence-bert[Reimers
and Gurevych, 2019] model to get the template sequence rep-
resentation. Although some recent methods proposed that
transforming raw log messages into a semantic vector directly
could prevent the loss of information due to log parsing er-
rors, embedding every log message is not realistic consider-
ing the large amount of log data. Studies also show that al-
most all anomalies could be detected by template sequence,
even if there are parsing errors. Thus, we only embed all
existing log templates. Each session has l fixed length, so
through the layer we can obtain the XRl×d for each session.
Encoder with Light Adapter As shown in figure 4, we
use stacked transformer encoder as our backbone model,
because transformer encoder with self attention mechanism
overcomes the limitations of RNN-based models and better

captures relation in sequence. Self-attention mechanism is
formally written as:

QK T(cid:112)d/heads

Attention(Q, K, V ) = sof tmax(

)V

(3)

where heads is the number of the heads, d denotes the di-
mension of the input, and Q, K, V represent queries, keys,
and values respectively.

The order of a log sequence conveys information of pro-
gram execution sequence. Wrong execution order is also con-
sidered abnormal. Thus, constant positional embedding is
also used. Component after self attention layer and feedfor-
ward layer is the adapter. It's a light-weight neural networks
between the transformer layers. When adapting a pretrained
language model to a new domain, adapters are inserted and
during adapter-based tuning, only parameters of the adapters
are updated on the new domain. More specifically, follow-
ing [Houlsby et al., 2019], we use down- and up-scale neural
networks as adapter and it immediately follows self attention
layer and feedforward layer in the Transformer. Two projec-
tion layers in adapter first map hidden vector from dimension
d to dimension m, and then map it back to d. The adapter
also has a skip-connection internally. By setting m << d,
we limit the number of parameters added per adapter. For-
mally, given a hidden vector h ∈ Rd, down-projection matrix
Wdown ∈ Rm×d and up-projection matrix Wup ∈ Rd×m, the
output vector h(cid:48) of the adapter is calculated as follow:

h(cid:48) = Wuptanh(Wdownh) + h

(4)

3.3 Pretraining
Inspired by the BERT model, which could learn general lan-
guage feature that further be used to improve the performance
of different downstream tasks, we use stacked transformer en-
coder to learn the common reason of log anomaly. Since the
input to these transformer layers is vector representations of
log templates, what model learns is the commonalities be-
tween different types of anomalies from semantic level.

More specifically, the objective of this stage is the same as
anomaly detection, which is a supervised classification task
without adapters in the model. Then, parameters obtained
from pretraining are shared to the next stage and frozen dur-
ing the next stage.
3.4 Adapter-based Tuning
When adapting a pretrained model from source domain to
a target domain, adapter based tuning inserts light weight
adapters, which are actually neural networks like [Houlsby
et al., 2019]. Adapters are between the transformer layers
of the pretrained model, and only parameters of the adapters
are updated during target domain adaption. Parameters of the
multi-headed attention and the feedforward layers are frozen.
Thus, unlike fine-tuning which has to update all the parame-
ters and introduces a entirely new model for a new domain,
adapter based tuning provides a plug-in mechanism to reuse
the old model with only few additional trainable parameters.
3.5 Training Strategy

Lpretrain = −Ex,y∈Dsrc

[log P (yx; Θ)]

x,y

(5)

Figure 3: Overview of our proposed architecture. All log event sequence is first fed into the pretrained language model to extract the
representations. The Transformer encoder is first trained on the high-resource source-domain dataset to acquire shared semantic information.
Then, we initialize the Transformer encoder and only tune the parameters of adapter on the low-resource target-domain dataset to transfer the
knowledge from source domain to target domain.

TRANSLOG with adapter[Houlsby et al., 2019] achieves al-
most the same performance as full fine-tuning.

Dataset
HDFS
BGL
Thunderbird

Category
Distributed

Supercomputer
Supercomputer

#Messages

#Anomaly

#Templates

11M
5M
10M

17K

-
-

49
423
1292

Table 1: A summary of the datasets used in this work. Messages
are the raw log strings. Samples are log sequences extracted by ID
or sliding window of size 20. In the following experiment, we con-
sider BGL and Thunderbird as similar domain since they are both
supercomputer logs.

Figure 4: The structure of the light adapter, where N is the number
of transformer layers.

[log P (yx; Θf , θa)]

x,y

Ladapter = −E

x,y∈Dtgt

(6)
In this work, we calculate two BCE loss functions.
Lpretrain represents the loss function in the pre-training stage
while Ladapter is the loss function in the adapter-based tun-
ing stage. Θ is the parameter of the model in the pretraining
stage. Θf is the parameter trained in the pretraining stage,
which is frozen in the adapter-based tuning stage. θa is the
parameter of the adapter. x and y are the input data and label
x,y represents the data coming from the source
respectively, Dsrc
domain, Dtgt
x,y represents the data coming from the target do-
main.

4 Experiments
In this section, we first experiment with three public datasets
from loghub[He et al., 2020], namely HDFS[Xu et al., 2010],
Blue Gene/L and Thunderbird[Oliner and Stearley, 2007],
which shows that our purposed TRANSLOG model achieves
the state-of-the-art performance in traditional log anomaly
detection. Then we find that fine-tuning using transferred
parameters, model converges much faster than training from
scratch and is more stable. It confirms the the feasibility of
transfer learning between different log data sources. Finally,
we show that using only 3.5% − 5.5% trainable parameters,

Datasets As explained previously, we conduct experiments
of TRANSLOG on three public datasets. TABLE 1 describe
the details of each dataset.

HDFS[Xu et al., 2010] dataset was generated and collected
from Amazon EC2 platform through running Hadoop-based
map-reduce jobs. It contains messages about blocks which
assign a unique ID to the raw logs. Thunderbird and BGL
datasets[Oliner and Stearley, 2007] contain logs collected
from a two supercomputer system at Sandia National Labs
(SNL) in Albuquerque. The log contains alert and non-alert
messages identified by alert category tags. Each log message
in the datasets was manually labeled as anomalous or not.
Preprocessing In the experiment, for HDFS, we extract log
sequences by block IDs, since logs with same block ID are
correlated. For Thunderbird and BGL, we leverage 10 million
continuous log messages from Thunderbird, which was also
used in prior work[Yao et al., 2020][Le and Zhang, 2021b]
and all BGL logs. BGL and Thunderbird do not have such
IDs, so we utilize a sliding window(size of 20) without over-
lap to generate log sequence.

For each dataset, we select first 80%(according to the
timestamps of logs) of log sequences for training, instead of
selecting randomly. This design ensures that the testing data
contains new logs previously unseen in the training phrase,
as it's a very common problem in log anomaly detection. The
rest of the dataset is used for testing.

instruction cache parity error corrected<*> double-hummer alignment exceptions<*> double-hummer alignment exceptionsLog Event SequenceSource Domainsession closed for user rootsession opened for user root by (uid=<*>)(root) CMD <*> <*>Class Label (Normal/Abnomal)ClassifierTransformer Encoder with Adapter Log Event Sequence............Target DomainFeature ExtractorTransformer EncoderClassifierClass Label (Normal/Abnomal)Feature ExtractorParameter InitializationPretrained LMPretrainingAdapter-based TuningLayer NormAdapterMulti-headedAttention+FFNAdapter+Layer NormTransformer layer×NDown-projectionUp-projection+AdapterT P

T P

T P +F P ), Recall (

Implementation Details
In experiment, we try different
number of transformer encoder layers in {1, 2, 4}. The num-
ber of attention heads is 8, and the size of the feedforward
network that takes the output of the multi-head self-attention
mechanism is 3072. We optimize using Adam whose learning
rate is scheduled by OneCycleLR, with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99,
and ε = 10−8. All runs are trained on 4 NVIDIA v100 with
a batch size of 64. For each dataset, we tune the maximum
learning of OneCycleLR scheduler in {1e−5, 5e−5, 1e−6}.
Evaluation In our experiments, we adopt three evaluation
metrics. They are Precision (
T P +F N ) and
F1 score( 2∗P recision∗Recall
P recision+Recall ). These evaluation metrics can
reflect the performance of the considered methods from dif-
ferent aspects. Precision is used to compute the percentages
of how many reported anomalies are correct. Recall shows
how many anomalies are detected among the true anomalies
set. While F1 score is harmonic mean value of Precision and
Recall.
Baselines We compare TRANSLOG with the six baseline
methods including Logistic Regression-based approach(LR),
Support Vector Machine-based approach(SVM), Deeplog,
LogAnomaly, LogRobust and Neurallog on the three datasets.
These methods could be classified as two categories, tradi-
tional machine learning approaches and neural network ap-
proaches. Traditional approaches first transform the log se-
quence into log count vectors, then build unsupervised or su-
pervised machine learning model to detect anomalies. Neu-
ral network approaches, instead of utilize log count vector,
leverages averaged word embeddings or contextual embed-
dings to represent each log templates in log sequence. Then,
sequential models like RNN or Bi-LSTM are used to detect
anomalies.

Dataset

Method

HDFS

BGL

LR
SVM

DeepLog

LogAnomaly
LogRobust
Neurallog
Translog

LR
SVM

DeepLog

LogAnomaly
LogRobust
NeuralLog
Translog

LR
SVM

DeepLog

Thunderbird LogAnomaly

Logrobust
NeuralLog
Translog

0.96
0.96
0.95
0.96
0.98
0.96
0.999
0.78
0.89
0.90
0.97
0.62
0.61
0.96
0.46
0.34

-

0.61
0.61
0.93
0.998

Precision Recall
0.91
0.97
0.96
0.94
0.99

F1 Score

0.93
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.98
0.98
0.998
0.78
0.87
0.86
0.96
0.73
0.68
0.97
0.61
0.50

-

0.68
0.68
0.96
0.997

1

0.996
0.79
0.86
0.83
0.94
0.96
0.78
0.98
0.91
0.91

-

0.78
0.78
1

0.996

Table 2: Experimental results on Thunderbird, BGL and HDFS. The
best results are highlighted.

Main Results To test the effectiveness of TRANSLOG, we
compare the proposed algorithm with methods on HDFS,
Thunderbird and BGL benchmarks. As is shown in TABLE

Method

Fine-tune

Adapter

Layers
1
2
4
1
2
4

Parameters HDFS Thunderbird
0.997
0.997
0.998
0.990
0.996
0.996

7.2M 0.998
14.3M 0.998
28.5M 0.997
0.4M 0.997
0.6M 0.997
1M 0.998

Table 3: Transfer result using fine-tuning and adapter based fine-
tuning. Layers is the number of transformer encoder layers. Param-
eters is the number of trainable parameters in the model.

2. We get the best recall and F1 score on the BGL dataset.
LogAnomaly [Meng et al., 2019] achieved the highest pre-
cision rate, but our proposed Tranlog can still provide very
competitive results. Our TRANSLOG achieves the best results
on HDFS benchmark. Through these three public datasets,
the effectiveness and generalization of our TRANSLOG model
can be verified. Our proposed Tranlog provides satisfactory
performance on three commonly used benchmakrs.

5 Analysis
Effect of Pretrained Log model
In this work, for the first
time, we discuss the transferability of different log domains.
Usually, a large service system has several components, and
new components also could be added due to system updates.
Each of them generates logs of their own domain. Thus, it's
hard for traditional methods to detect anomalies in a com-
plex software system since they can only handle one data
source. Detecting anomalies in a large service system us-
ing such methods requires many different copies of models,
which is costly. It's necessary to find a transfer method that
performs well on logs from different components, but without
training an entire new model for every new component.

To demonstrate the possibility of transferring between dif-
ferent log domains, in this section, we compare the perfor-
mance of model trained from scratch, as well as model fine-
tuned from parameters trained on source domain. We use
BGL as source domain. HDFS and Thunderbird are consid-
ered as target domains. In the following analysis, we further
treat HDFS as a different domain, as it's a distributed system,
and treat Thunderbird as a similar domain, as it's a supercom-
puter like BGL.

We compare the two method in terms of their rate of con-
vergence and final result. Figure 5 plots the loss and F1 score
curves w.r.t training batches of first epoch. We observe that
fine-tuning converge faster than training from scratch on both
HDFS and Thunderbird. It proves that parameters could be
transferred between domains, even they are from different do-
main. We also found that fine-tuning is more stable, with a
smoother curve. These observation is more obvious on Thun-
derbird, which may because transfer is more effective in sim-
ilar domain. The final result of these two training methods
are close, however. This is because TRANSLOG can have a
good performance even trained from scratch.
Efficiency of Adapter-based Tuning Although we have
verified that parameters transfer could accelerate model con-
verge in a new domain and achieve a better result with the

(a) HDFS

(b) Thunderbird

Figure 5: Loss and F1 score during training w.r.t. the number of batches. Result of fine-tuning are based on 1-layer TRANSLOG trained on
BGL dataset. Both of training and fine-tuning use the same learning rate.

same number of training samples, fine-tuning a whole model
for each components is also expensive. Thus, we use a param-
eter efficient strategy, called adapter[Houlsby et al., 2019],
to enable a high degree of sharing between them. By using
adapter, we can get a compact model, which could be used
to solve many tasks by adding a small number of additional
parameters. Although work has shown that adapter performs
well in NLP tasks, whether adapter could also be used in logs
and learn the semantic information about log anomaly have
not been studied.

In this section, we further compare transfer performance
using fine-tuning and adapter-based tuning. All experiments
in this section are based on model trained on BGL. On each
dataset, we use batch size 64, and tune the learning in {1e −
5, 5e − 5, 1e − 6} and find that 5e − 5 is the best for HDFS,
1e − 5 is the best for Thunderbird. We also try the layers of
TRANSLOG model in {1, 2, 4}.
Table 3 summarizes the results. We observe that adapters
offer competitive model. They only use 3.5% − 5.5% of the
parameters of the original model to get almost the same per-
formance as full fine-tuning. We also try a different num-
ber of transformer encoders and found that increasing it for
full fine-tuning does not always yield better results. How-
ever, adapter-tuning is more robust to layers, which also in-
troduces more parameters. On HDFS datasets, the result of
adapter-tuning does not decrease with layers increase.
Example Study Figure 5 shows that fine-tuning yields bet-
ter results with the same number of training examples, espe-
cially at the beginning. Previous works also show that adapter
performs better than fine-tuning in different NLP tasks with
low-resource setting.[He et al., ]. Thus, we further consider
tasks with fewer than 50k training examples as low-resource
tasks, as log data is easy to obtain and be labeled manually
and experiment with HDFS and Thunderbird in low-resource
tasks. Figure 6 shows the performance with varying numbers
of training examples. We observe that with no more than 1M

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Test performance w.r.t.the number of training examples.
(a) HDFS. 5k, 10k, 20k, 50k corresponding to the font 1.1%, 2.2%,
4.3%, 10%training data respectively.
(b) Thunderbird. 5k, 10k,
20k, 50k corresponding to font 2.5%, 5.3%, 10.6%, 27.4%training
data. We sample these randomly, since the anomalies in Thunderbird
mainly concentrate in the latter part of training data.

parameters, adapter based tuning is comparable to full fune-
tuning. When the number of training examples increase to
50k, both methods achieve similar results.

To summarize, adapter tuning is highly parameter-efficient
and shared parameters contain semantic information that
helps model to detect anomalies. Training adapters with sizes
less than 5%, performance decreases nearly 1%.

6 Conclusion
Logs are one of the most valuable data in the scene of sys-
tem operation and maintenance. Existing log anomaly de-
tection methods fail to generalize well on unseen new log
samples.
In this paper, we propose TRANSLOG, a unified
log anomaly detection method that uses a novel pretrained
model to extract the semantic embedding vector from log
templates based on attention mechanism. Extensive experi-
ments strongly demonstrate the performance of TRANSLOG
outperforms all previous baselines.

References
[Bapna and Firat, 2019] Ankur Bapna and Orhan Firat. Sim-
ple, scalable adaptation for neural machine translation. In
EMNLP 2019, pages 1538 -- 1548, 2019.

[Breier and Branisov´a, 2015] Jakub

Branisov´a.
data mining techniques.
Applications. 2015.

Jana
Anomaly detection from log files using
In Information Science and

Breier

and

[Dang et al., 2019] Yingnong Dang, Qingwei Lin, and Peng
Huang. Aiops: real-world challenges and research innova-
tions. In ICSE 2019, 2019.

[Devlin et al., 2018] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Ken-
ton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. NAACL 2019, 2018.

[Du and Li, 2016] Min Du and Feifei Li. Spell: Streaming

parsing of system event logs. In ICDM 2016, 2016.

[Du et al., 2017] Min Du, Feifei Li, Guineng Zheng, and
Vivek Srikumar. Deeplog: Anomaly detection and diag-
In CCS
nosis from system logs through deep learning.
2017, 2017.

[Grubbs, 1969] Frank E Grubbs. Procedures for detecting

outlying observations in samples. Technometrics, 1969.

[He et al., ] Ruidan He, Linlin Liu, Hai Ye, Qingyu Tan,
Bosheng Ding, Liying Cheng, Jia-Wei Low, Lidong Bing,
and Luo Si. On the effectiveness of adapter-based tuning
for pretrained language model adaptation. In ACL 2021,
pages 2208 -- 2222.

[He et al., 2017] Pinjia He, Jieming Zhu, Zibin Zheng, and
Michael R Lyu. Drain: An online log parsing approach
with fixed depth tree. In ICWS 2017, pages 33 -- 40, 2017.
[He et al., 2020] Shilin He, Jieming Zhu, Pinjia He, and
Michael R. Lyu. Loghub: A large collection of sys-
tem log datasets towards automated log analytics. CoRR,
abs/2008.06448, 2020.

[Houlsby et al., 2019] Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanis-
law Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe,
Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly.
In ICML
Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
2019, 2019.

[Huang et al., 2020] Shaohan Huang, Yi Liu, Carol Fung,
Rong He, Yining Zhao, Hailong Yang, and Zhongzhi
Luan. Hitanomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly
detection in system log. TNSM, 17(4):2064 -- 2076, 2020.
[Jiang et al., 2008] Zhen Ming Jiang, Ahmed E. Hassan, Par-
minder Flora, and Gilbert Hamann. Abstracting execution
logs to execution events for enterprise applications (short
paper). In QSIC 2008, pages 181 -- 186, 2008.

[Le and Zhang, 2021a] Van-Hoang Le and Hongyu Zhang.
Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.01955, abs/2108.01955, 2021.

[Le and Zhang, 2021b] Van-Hoang Le and Hongyu Zhang.
Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing. CoRR,
abs/2108.01955, 2021.

[Lu et al., 2018] Siyang Lu, Xiang Wei, Yandong Li, and
Liqiang Wang. Detecting anomaly in big data system logs
using convolutional neural network. In DASC 2018, pages
151 -- 158, 2018.

[Makanju et al., 2009] Adetokunbo Makanju, A. Nur Zincir-
Heywood, and Evangelos E. Milios. Clustering event logs
In KDD 2009, pages 1255 -- 
using iterative partitioning.
1264, 2009.

[Meng et al., 2019] Weibin Meng, Ying Liu, Yichen Zhu,
Shenglin Zhang, Dan Pei, Yuqing Liu, Yihao Chen, Ruizhi
Zhang, Shimin Tao, Pei Sun, et al. Loganomaly: Unsuper-
vised detection of sequential and quantitative anomalies in
unstructured logs. In IJCAI 2019, 2019.

[Niu et al., 2011] Zhixian Niu, Shuping Shi, Jingyu Sun, and
Xiu He. A survey of outlier detection methodologies and
their applications. In AICI 2011, pages 380 -- 387, 2011.

[Oliner and Stearley, 2007] Adam J. Oliner and Jon Stearley.
What supercomputers say: A study of five system logs. In
DSN 2007, pages 575 -- 584, 2007.

[Radford et al., 2018] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan,
Improving language

Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever.
understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.

[Reimers and Gurevych, 2019] Nils Reimers

and Iryna
Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings us-
In EMNLP 2019, pages

Gurevych.
ing siamese bert-networks.
3980 -- 3990, 2019.

[Stickland and Murray, 2019] Asa Cooper Stickland and Iain
Murray. BERT and pals: Projected attention layers for
efficient adaptation in multi-task learning. In ICML 2019,
pages 5986 -- 5995, 2019.

[Vaswani et al., 2017] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki
Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you
need. NIPS 2017, 2017.

[Xu et al., 2010] Wei Xu, Ling Huang, Armando Fox, David
Patterson, and Michael I Jordan. Detecting large-scale sys-
In ICML 2010,
tem problems by mining console logs.
2010.

[Yao et al., 2020] Kundi Yao, Heng Li, Weiyi Shang, and
Ahmed E. Hassan. A study of the performance of general
compressors on log files. ESE, 25(5):3043 -- 3085, 2020.

[Zhang et al., 2015] Shenglin Zhang, Ying Liu, Dan Pei,
Yu Chen, Xianping Qu, Shimin Tao, and Zhi Zang. Rap-
idand robust impact assessment of software changes in
large internet-based services. In ENET 2015, 2015.

[Zhang et al., 2016] Ke Zhang, Jianwu Xu, Martin Renqiang
Min, Guofei Jiang, Konstantinos Pelechrinis, and Hui
Zhang. Automated it system failure prediction: A deep
learning approach. In BigData 2016, 2016.

[Zhang et al., 2019] Xu Zhang, Yong Xu, Qingwei Lin,
Bo Qiao, Hongyu Zhang, Yingnong Dang, Chunyu Xie,
Xinsheng Yang, Qian Cheng, Ze Li, et al. Robust log-
In FSE
based anomaly detection on unstable log data.
2019, 2019.

